# Endoscopic management of gastrointestinal motility disorders – part 1: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline

## Authors

Bas L. A. M. Weusten<sup>1, 2</sup>, Maximilien Barret<sup>3</sup>, Albert J. Bredenoord<sup>4</sup>, Pietro Familiari<sup>5</sup>, Jan-Michel Gonzalez<sup>6</sup>, Jeanin E. van Hooft<sup>4</sup>, Sauid Ishaq<sup>7</sup>, Vicente Lorenzo-Zúñiga<sup>8</sup>, Hubert Louis<sup>9</sup>, Suzanne van Meer<sup>1, 2</sup>, Helmut Neumann<sup>10</sup>, Daniel Pohl<sup>11</sup>, Frederic Prat<sup>3</sup>, Daniel von Renteln<sup>12</sup>, Edoardo Savarino<sup>13</sup>, Rami Sweis<sup>14</sup>, Jan Tack<sup>15</sup>, Radu Tutuian<sup>16</sup>, Jan Martinek<sup>17</sup>

## Institutions

1. Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
2. Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, St Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands
3. Department of Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology, Cochin Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris and University of Paris, Paris, France
4. Department of Gastroenterology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
5. Digestive Endoscopy Unit, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, IRCCS, Rome, Italy
6. Department of Gastroenterology, Hôpital Nord, Marseille, France
7. Department of Gastroenterology, Dudley Group NHS Foundation Trust and Birmingham City University, Birmingham, UK
8. Endoscopy Unit, University Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain
9. Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatopancreatology and Digestive Oncology, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium
10. Department of Medicine I, University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany
11. Department of Health Sciences, Beaujon Hospital, Clichy, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris and University of Paris, Paris, France
12. Division of Gastroenterology, Montréal University Hospital (CHUM), Montréal, Canada
13. Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, DiSCOG, University of Padua, Padua, Italy
14. Department of Gastroenterology, University College London Hospital, London, UK
15. Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
16. Department of Gastroenterology, University Clinic for Visceral Surgery and Medicine, Bern University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland
17. Department of Hepatogastroenterology, Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic

## Bibliography

DOI https://doi.org/10.1055/a-1160-5549
Published online: 6.5.2020 | Endoscopy 2020; 52: 498–515
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York
ISSN 0013-726X

## Corresponding author

Bas L.A.M. Weusten, MD, PhD, Dept of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Internal mail no F02.618, P.O. Box 85500, 3508 GA UTRECHT, The Netherlands
b.l.a.weusten@umcutrecht.nl

Appendix 1s – 3s
Online content viewable at:
https://doi.org/10.1055/a-1160-5549

## MAIN RECOMMENDATIONS

ESGE recommends the use of a graded pneumatic dilation protocol in achalasia, starting with a 30-mm dilation and followed by a 35-mm dilation at a planned interval of 2 – 4 weeks, with a subsequent 40-mm dilation when there is insufficient relief, over both a single balloon dilation procedure or the use of a larger balloon from the outset.
Strong recommendation, high quality of evidence, level of agreement 100%.

ESGE recommends being cautious in treating spastic motility disorders other than achalasia with peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM).
Strong recommendation, very low quality of evidence, level of agreement 87.5%.

ESGE recommends against the routine use of botulinum toxin injections to treat patients with non-achalasia hypercontractile esophageal motility disorders (Jackhammer esophagus, distal esophageal spasm). However, if, in individual patients, endoscopic injection of botulinum toxin is chosen, ESGE recommends performing injections into four quadrants of the lower esophageal sphincter and in the lower third of the esophagus.
Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 78.6%.

ESGE recommends that endoscopic pylorus-directed therapy should be considered only in patients with symptoms suggestive of gastroparesis in combination with objective proof of delayed gastric emptying using a validated test, and only when medical therapy has failed.
Strong recommendation, very low quality of evidence, level of agreement 100%.

ESGE recommends against the use of botulinum toxin injection in the treatment of unselected patients with gastroparesis.
Strong recommendation, high quality of evidence, level of agreement 92.9%.

ESGE recommends consideration of gastric peroral endoscopic myotomy (G-POEM) in carefully selected patients only, because it is an emerging procedure with limited data on effectiveness, safety, and durability. G-POEM should be performed in expert centers only, preferably in the context of a clinical trial.
Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 100%.

> **SOURCE AND SCOPE**
>
> This Guideline is an official statement of the European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE). It provides guidance on the endoscopic management of achalasia and gastroparesis. The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system was adopted to define the strength of recommendations and the quality of evidence.

## 1 Introduction

Therapeutic gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy is rapidly evolving. Its role in the management of motility disorders of the digestive tract is increasing. The purpose of this guideline is to provide guidance on various aspects of the endoscopic management of GI motility disorders. This first of two parts of the guideline is dedicated to achalasia and gastroparesis. The second part of this guideline will be published separately and focuses on Zenker's diverticulum, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), intractable constipation, and Ogilvie's syndrome.

## 2 Methodology

The ESGE commissioned this Guideline (Guideline Committee chair, J.v.H.) and appointed a Guideline leader (B.W.), who identified six clinical conditions of abnormal GI motility in which therapeutic endoscopy is one of the treatment possibilities: Zenker's diverticulum, achalasia, GERD, gastroparesis, intractable constipation, and Ogilvie's syndrome. These six areas were at a later stage agreed on by the Guideline committee members.

In March 2018, an email was sent out to several key opinion leaders in the field of therapeutic endoscopy to identify potential Guideline committee members. Individual ESGE members were informed about this Guideline and were asked to apply if they were interested in participating with this Guideline. Three individual members (V.L.-Z., H.L., and F.P.) were selected based

| Abbreviation | Definition |
|---|---|
| **CRP** | C-reactive protein |
| **CT** | computed tomography |
| **EGJ** | esophagogastric junction |
| **ESGE** | European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy |
| **ESNM** | European Society of Neurogastroenterology and Motility |
| **GERD** | gastroesophageal reflux disease |
| **GCSI** | gastroparesis cardinal symptom index |
| **GI** | gastrointestinal |
| **G-POEM** | gastric peroral endoscopic myotomy |
| **GRADE** | Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation |
| **IRP** | integrated lower esophageal sphincter relaxation pressure |
| **IT-knife** | Insulated Tip knife |
| **LES** | lower esophageal sphincter |
| **LHM** | laparoscopic Heller myotomy |
| **OTSC** | over-the-scope clip |
| **POEM** | peroral endoscopic myotomy |
| **PPI** | proton pump inhibitor |
| **RCT** | randomized controlled trial |
| **SEMS** | self-expandable metal stent |
| **TT-knife** | Triangle Tip knife |
| **UEG** | United European Gastroenterology |

on their expertise and scientific output. In addition, the European Society of Neurogastroenterology and Motility (ESNM) was approached for collaboration and scientific input. As a result, the ESNM appointed on request four Guideline committee members who were regarded as experts in the field of GI motility and therapy (D.P., E.S., J.T., and R.T.). Finally, a Guideline committee was formed comprising of 18 members, and covering the six areas of this guideline. Six task forces were created, based on the six clinical conditions. Each task force had one or two task force leaders, and each group member was assigned to one or more task forces (Appendix 1s, see online-only Supplementary Material). The kick-off meeting for this Guideline was held during United European Gastroenterology (UEG) Week, on 21 October 2018, in Vienna.

During a teleconference in November 2018, clinical questions were formulated for the six clinical conditions. Subsequently, these clinical questions were translated into research questions (Appendix 2s). The questions followed the PICO format (P, population in question; I, intervention; C, comparator; and O, outcomes of interest) wherever appropriate. Subsequently, systematic literature searches were done using MEDLINE, Embase, and the Cochrane library.

Evidence levels and recommendation strengths were assessed using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system [1]. Further details on the methodology of ESGE guidelines have been reported elsewhere [2]. The results of data extraction are presented in Appendix 3s.

Available literature, draft recommendations, and strength of evidence were discussed during a face-to-face meeting with all group members at Schiphol Airport, Amsterdam on 12 April 2019.

In order to establish consensus-based recommendations, a modified Delphi process [3] was organized using an online voting platform (www.surveymonkey.com). Voting was based upon a five-point Likert scale (1, strongly disagree; 2, disagree; 3, neither disagree nor agree; 4, agree; 5, strongly agree). A recommendation was approved if > 75% of the members agreed (reflected by a Likert score of 4–5). In total, three iterations of the online voting process were needed to reach the final document.

In January 2020, a draft prepared by B.W. was sent to all group members. After the agreement of all group members had been obtained, the manuscript was reviewed by the ESGE Guideline Committee Chair (J.v.H.) and two external reviewers, and was sent for further comments to the ESGE national societies and individual members. After this, it was submitted to *Endoscopy* for publication.

## 3 Achalasia and other primary esophageal motility disorders

Idiopathic achalasia is a rare disease and affects individuals of both sexes and all ages. The annual incidence is estimated to be between 1.07 and 2.2 cases per 100 000 individuals, with prevalence rates estimated between 10 and 15.7 per 100 000 individuals [4, 5]. Achalasia is a primary esophageal motility disorder characterized by insufficient relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) in combination with absent peristalsis, which leads to symptoms of dysphagia, regurgitation, chest pain, or weight loss [6]. Besides achalasia, other primary esophageal motility disorders, such as absent contractility, distal esophageal spasm, and hypercontractile (Jackhammer) esophagus, are also recognized [7].

Parallel to the development of the current ESGE guideline, an achalasia-specific guideline was written by a joint UEG and ESNM endeavor [8]. Before this, it was agreed that general research questions regarding types of treatment for achalasia would be covered by the UEG/ESNM guideline and that the ESGE guideline would focus on the technical aspects, as far as the endoscopic treatment was concerned, and that statements would be cross-referenced when appropriate. **▶Table 1** summarizes the relevant recommendations of the UEG/ESNM guideline. For supportive evidence, please refer to the original paper [8]. The current ESGE guideline should be considered as complementary to the UEG/ESNM guideline.

### 3.1 Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM)

Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) as a treatment modality for achalasia was first described in humans by Inoue et al. [9]. In short, after creating a mucosal entry, the endoscope is advanced through the submucosal space. Subsequently, a myotomy of the muscle layer of the esophagus including the LES is carried out, which is protected by the overlying intact mucosa. On completion, the mucosal entry is closed.

#### 3.1.1 Use of CO₂

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends performing POEM using low-flow CO₂ insufflation.
> Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 100%.

CO₂ insufflation was used for POEM in the vast majority of published series [9–12]. CO₂ is reabsorbed more quickly than room air, and its use reduces the risk of gas-related complications, including pneumoperitoneum, pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax, abdominal compartment syndrome, and subcutaneous emphysema.

In a large retrospective cohort study of complications after POEM, a very high incidence of major gas-related complications (27.8%) was reported, especially during the first year when insufflation of room air was used during POEM [13]. The major complication rate declined to 1.9% after the introduction of CO₂ insufflation and seemed to plateau after 3.5 years at around 1%.

Gas-related adverse events may also occur with CO₂. When deterioration in circulatory and/or respiratory function is observed during POEM, the procedure should be temporarily stopped. When a high-pressure (tension) pneumoperitoneum occurs as a result of excessive CO₂ insufflation through the sub-

mucosal tunnel, an abdominal puncture with a needle is a simple but effective solution to decompress the abdomen and release the tension. The use of "low flow" or "very low flow" CO₂ insufflation decreases the incidence of tension pneumoperitoneum, compared with the use of "mid flow" or "high flow" inflation [11].

#### 3.1.2 Perioperative use of antibiotics

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends the prophylactic perioperative use of antibiotics when performing POEM. The choice and duration of antibiotics should be adapted according to national or local protocols.
> Strong recommendation, very low quality of evidence, level of agreement 100%.

Perioperative antibiotics are recommended during "clean-contaminated" surgery [14]. Because POEM can be analogized to clean-contaminated supra-mesocolic digestive surgery, current guidelines for antibiotic prophylaxis during clean-contaminated surgery should apply. A first- or second-generation cephalosporin aimed at meticillin-sensitive *Staphylococcus aureus*, *Escherichia coli*, and enterobacteriae is a standard recommendation for this type of surgery, but adaptations can be implemented along national guidelines or as discussed with local infection control teams depending on local bacteriological ecology. A single-dose injected intravenously between 1 hour before and the induction of anesthesia is generally considered appropriate, with the assumption that the intervention duration generally does not exceed 2 hours [15].

With regard to antibiotics during POEM, only three randomized studies including very small patient samples have been published, none of them as a full paper. One study showed no benefit of perioperative antibiotics over preoperative antibiotics only, but found a significant inflammatory response and probable microbial translocation in both groups, therefore sup-

---

**Table 1** Summary of relevant recommendations on achalasia from the European Guideline on Achalasia by UEG and ESMN [8].

| Recommendations | Strength | Certainty of evidence |
|---|---|---|
| We recommend that, in the treatment of achalasia, symptom relief should be regarded as the primary treatment aim | Expert opinion | |
| We recommend that improvement of objectively measured esophageal emptying should be regarded as an important additional treatment aim | Expert opinion | |
| Botulinum toxin therapy can be considered an effective and safe therapy for short-term symptom relief in esophageal achalasia | Conditional recommendation | Moderate |
| Graded pneumatic dilatation is an effective and relatively safe treatment for esophageal achalasia | Strong recommendation | Strong |
| Peroral endoscopic myotomy is an effective and relatively safe treatment for esophageal achalasia | Conditional recommendation | Moderate |
| Laparoscopic Heller myotomy (LHM) combined with an antireflux procedure is an effective and relatively safe therapy for achalasia | Conditional recommendation | Moderate |
| We suggest age and manometric subtype be taken into account when selecting a therapeutic strategy | Conditional recommendation | Moderate |
| Treatment decisions in achalasia should be made based on patient-specific characteristics, the patient's preference, possible side effects and/or complications, and a center's expertise. Overall, graded repetitive pneumatic dilation, LHM, and POEM have comparable efficacy | Strong recommendation | Moderate |
| Botulinum toxin therapy should be reserved for patients who are too unfit for more invasive treatments, or in whom a more definite treatment needs to be deferred | Conditional recommendation | Moderate |
| We suggest treating recurrent or persistent dysphagia after LHM with pneumatic dilation, POEM, or redo surgery | Conditional recommendation | Very low |
| We suggest treating recurrent or persistent dysphagia after POEM with either re-POEM, LHM, or pneumatic dilation | Conditional recommendation | Very low |
| We recommend follow-up endoscopy to screen for GERD in patients treated with myotomy without an antireflux procedure. If reflux symptoms occur in the absence of reflux esophagitis, TBE, empiric PPI therapy, and/or 24-hour esophageal pH-(impedance) monitoring can be considered. PPIs are the first-line treatment of GERD after achalasia treatment. We recommend lifelong PPI therapy in patients with esophagitis > grade A | Expert opinion | |

LHM, laparoscopic Heller myotomy; POEM, peroral endoscopic myotomy; GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease; TBE, timed barium esophagogram; PPI, proton pump inhibitor.

---

porting the need for antibiotic prophylaxis [16]. Another study found a reduced need for postoperative antibiotics in the group receiving preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis, although no difference existed in the number of documented infections [17]. The last study found no additional clinical benefit from preoperative antibiotics over postoperative antibiotics alone for the prevention of infection after POEM [18].

### 3.1.3 Location of submucosal tunnel

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends that POEM can be performed on either the anterior (12–3 o'clock in supine position) or posterior (5–7 o'clock) side.
> Strong recommendation, high quality of evidence, level of agreement 100%.

In contrast to laparoscopic Heller myotomy (LHM), POEM may be performed on any side of the esophagus. Anterior myotomy (also lesser curvature myotomy, 12–3 o'clock in the supine position) was the first approach implemented. This approach is considered to preserve the posterior sling fibers alongside the angle of His. In 2013, anterior myotomy was the preferred approach among the majority of centers performing POEM [19]. Posterior myotomy (5–7 o'clock in the supine position) was introduced later, and several centers adopted this approach as standard because of some theoretical advantages, such as the easier myotomy owing to the perpendicular axis of the knife towards the circular muscle fibers.

A total of four studies (only two published as full papers) have compared these two approaches in terms of efficacy, safety, and post-POEM reflux. In the first randomized study, there were no significant differences between anterior and posterior POEM with regard to efficacy and overall safety, the occurrence of mucosal injuries was higher in the anterior myotomy group and acid exposure was higher with the posterior myotomy approach [20]. Tan et al. found no significant differences between patients with anterior vs. posterior POEM in terms of treatment success, physiological parameters, such as integrated LES relaxation pressure (IRP), and post-POEM reflux [21]. Both studies included small numbers of patients and may have been underpowered to detect real differences between the two approaches. Moreover, the follow-up was short (less than 2 years). In a recent single-blind randomized trial comprising 150 patients, no differences were found in efficacy, safety, and post-procedural reflux between the anterior and the posterior approach [22]. A recent systematic review concluded that anterior and posterior myotomy are equally effective, without significant differences in post-procedural GERD [23].

One study demonstrated that POEM on the side of the greater curvature is also feasible and effective [24]. Therefore, if required (fibrosis, previous POEM and/or LHM, or diverticula), POEM may be performed on the side of the greater curvature; however, no comparative data exist for greater curvature POEM vs. anterior or posterior POEM.

There are no comparative data on the preferred myotomy side in patients undergoing POEM after failed LHM or in patients undergoing redo-POEM. The tunneling and myotomy should avoid the site of the previous laparoscopic myotomy because of scarring and fibrosis and should therefore be done on the posterior side (5–7 o'clock) or on the side of the lesser curvature (2–3 o'clock) [25–29].

Redo-POEM (POEM after failed POEM) is normally (and logically) undertaken on the opposite side to the index procedure in order to avoid submucosal fibrosis. Thus, in patients who had an anterior POEM, redo-POEM should be performed on the posterior side, and vice versa. Therefore, a report should always mention at which site POEM was performed. There are no comparative data examining the outcomes of anterior vs. posterior procedures in patients undergoing redo-POEM. An international multicenter retrospective study reported the short-term (3 months) clinical success of redo-POEM to be 85% [30].

### 3.1.4 Distal extension of myotomy

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends in POEM extending the length of the myotomy 2–3 cm into the gastric side of the cardia.
> Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 100%.

In the vast majority of open-label series of POEM and in all randomized controlled trials (RCTs), a 2–3-cm extension of the myotomy into the cardia has been described [31–33]. This practice was initially undertaken to replicate the extension of the myotomy into the cardia during the laparoscopic and open Heller myotomy procedures, although the supportive evidence for this practice during surgery was also weak. Per-procedural distensibility data with Endoflip show that further extension beyond 2–3 cm does not increase distensibility further, thereby suggesting that a 2-cm extension is sufficient [34]. It has been proposed that limiting the myotomy to 2 cm into the cardia might lead to less reflux, but the evidence for this is weak and indirect [35]. All published POEM outcome data, including efficacy, complications, and reflux risk, are based on implementing a myotomy extension of 2–3 cm into the cardia, so this technique is now considered to be the standard reference method.

### 3.1.5 Circular versus full myotomy

There are three retrospective cohorts comparing full-thickness myotomy with myotomy targeting only the circular muscle layers [36–38]. The efficacy with regards to subjective and objective measures seems similar; however, it has been suggested that full myotomy is associated with shorter procedure times and circular myotomy potentially with lower reflux rates. Because direct comparisons from prospective studies with appropriate methodology are lacking, full myotomy is the most used and described technique, and most clinical trials have used full myotomy, it is considered the current reference technique.

## 3.1.6 Closure of tunnel entry

In most series and trials, the mucosal entry is closed with simple clips, but other techniques such as a multi-firing clip device, endoscopic suturing, and the over-the-scope clip (OTSC) device (Ovesco, Tübingen, Germany) have been described. Closure of the mucosal entry seldom results in complications such as reopening and it therefore seems unlikely that a comparative trial on complications following closure as an end point will ever be performed.

There are two comparative studies on closure techniques, but no randomizations were performed, both had small sample sizes, and there is a suspicion of considerable bias [39, 40]. Neither study found a difference between single clips vs. multi-firing clips or single clips vs. endoscopic suturing. A retrospective description of two cases in which closure of the mucosal entry was not possible with standard clips described the successful use of the OTSC device for this purpose [41]. Owing to the lack of evidence on efficacy and safety, no recommendation is made on this aspect of management.

## 3.1.7 Antibiotic lavage of the tunnel

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE does not recommend lavage of the submucosal tunnel with antibiotics.
> Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 93.8%.

Lavage of the submucosal tunnel has been performed in several centers in order to decrease the risk of infectious complications; however, a negligible risk of infectious adverse events has consistently been reported across centers that both do and do not perform lavage. As such, lavage is not universal, and in fact several centers have changed their practice because infectious complications are exceedingly rare. The only study addressing this issue is a single-center retrospective analysis, which demonstrated no difference in terms of infectious complications between patients who did and did not undergo gentamicin lavage [42]. Although patients who had lavage had a lower post-POEM serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level and lower white blood cell count, the differences were not clinically relevant.

## 3.1.8 Knives and electrosurgical settings

Any needle-knife can be used for POEM; the decision should be made according to the preference and experience of the endoscopist. It is unlikely that the type of needle-knife used will affect the safety profile or efficacy of the procedure.

Inoue's original technique involved the use of the Triangle Tip knife (TT-knife; KD-640L, Olympus) for mucosal incision, submucosal dissection, and myotomy [9]. In the vast majority of published series, the TT-knife was the device of choice.

The group of Zhou and colleagues from Shanghai first described the use of the T-type HybridKnife (ERBE, Tübingen, Germany) for POEM [43]. Indeed, the HybridKnife is now widely used in many centers, even if published series are lacking. In addition, the HookKnife (KD-620LR, Olympus) is also used by several centers.

Two studies have compared the TT-knife and HybridKnife [43, 44]. An RCT by Cai et al. on 100 patients and a case–control study by Tang et al. on 67 patients found that the HybridKnife was associated with a significantly shorter procedure time and fewer minor procedural bleeding episodes compared with the TT-knife. In both studies, complication rates, success rates, and efficacies were comparable.

Recently, a new TT-knife equipped with injection facilities was introduced into clinical practice (the TT-knife J; KD-645L, Olympus). A study by Nabi et al. retrospectively compared the traditional TT-knife with the new TT-knife J in 193 patients [45]. No difference was observed in technical success. The procedural time was significantly shorter in the TT-knife J group as compared with the TT-knife group. Significantly fewer uses of coagulation forceps and exchanges of accessories were required in the TT-knife J group.

The settings for the electrosurgical generator vary between the different brands and models, as well as between the assortment of devices and needle-knives. Therefore, the specific electrosurgical generator settings should be manufacturer and knife specific. In the published studies, the vast majority of authors used an ERBE (Tübingen, Germany) electrosurgical generator, the most commonly used being the VIO300D. For the mucosal incision, the preferred settings were "Dry cut mode, 50W, effect 3," "Endocut Q mode, effect 2," or "Endocut I mode, effect 2." For the submucosal dissection and myotomy, when a TT-knife was used, the preferred setting was "Spray coagulation mode, 50W, effect 2"; when a HybridKnife was used, the preferred settings were "Spray coagulation mode, 50W, effect 2," "Swift coagulation mode, 35–50W, effect 3–5," "Endocut Q, effect 2." "Soft coagulation mode, 80W, effect 5" was most often used for hemostasis with coagulation forceps.

## 3.1.9 Postoperative care

With regard to the postoperative care of patients after POEM, no specific recommendations can be deduced from the analysis of the current literature. However, after the procedure, patients should be carefully monitored in order to recognize possible complications. Chest and abdominal pain are common during the first 24 hours after POEM, but usually respond promptly to mild analgesic therapy (i.e. paracetamol 1000mg intravenously, 3–4 times a day). Mild opioids (i.e. tramadol 100mg) can be used if the first-line analgesic therapy fails, although intravenous or subcutaneous morphine may also be required for a short period.

A chest radiograph or a computed tomography (CT) scan should be considered only in the context of a suspected perforation or pleural effusion, or to exclude other more serious complications. In some preliminary studies, a CT scan was routinely performed after POEM, revealing a high prevalence of pneumoperitoneum, pneumomediastinum, or pneumothorax [9, 13, 46, 47]. However, the vast majority of such events are asymptomatic and require no interventions. Furthermore, there is no significant correlation between the occurrence of

pneumomediastinum and/or pneumoperitoneum on CT scan and the development of severe complications, including delayed hemorrhage, esophageal perforation, and retroperitoneal abscess [48]. The use of a post-procedure CT scan in asymptomatic patients should therefore be avoided.

As a routine, a Gastrografin or barium esophagram was performed the day after POEM in several studies to confirm the mucosal integrity before oral feeding. Other authors preferred an endoscopy on the day after POEM to rule out mucosal complications, including ulceration, hematoma, dehiscence, or ischemia, before the resumption of oral feeding [10–12]. However, major or significant complications and adverse events are rare and, if they do occur, they are rarely asymptomatic, while minor mucosal injuries do not tend to alter the postoperative course [49]. Therefore, the routine use of a Gastrografin or barium esophagram or an endoscopy after POEM is maybe an excessive prophylactic measure and of debatable value.

No studies have compared or analyzed the optimal dietary regimen after POEM. Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to keep the patients fasting for at least 24 hours after the procedure to prevent the early dislodgment of the clips used to close the mucosal incision and to avoid complications. Patients should be fed with liquids only on the day after the procedure, and with a soft diet for the following 1–2 weeks. In two series, patients developed major complications related to non-adherence to the recommended dietary restrictions within the immediate (1–2 days) following POEM [13, 49].

Finally, double-dose proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are usually prescribed for 2–4 weeks after POEM to facilitate the healing of the traumatized mucosa and to prevent symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux [10–12, 47, 50]. Thereafter, gastroesophageal reflux should be treated, usually with long-term PPIs, in all patients with typical reflux symptoms and/or reflux esophagitis grade B or higher.

### 3.1.10 POEM for spastic esophageal motility disorders other than achalasia

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends being cautious in treating spastic motility disorders other than achalasia with POEM.
> Strong recommendation, very low quality of evidence, level of agreement 87.5%.

There are no comparative studies that address the treatment of spastic and hypercontractile disorders with POEM or alternative therapies. Also, owing to the nature of the intervention (POEM), none of the published series can incorporate blinding, with considerable bias therefore being inevitable. All of the reports present small series of cases with unknown or short-term follow-up [51–69]. A subset of these series reports only subjective results, some using non-validated questionnaires. It is uncertain if safety can be assessed using the literature, as considerable publication bias is suspected.

Two RCTs compared endoscopic botulinum toxin injections in the esophagus with sham injections. The first study showed some effect of botulinum toxin on symptoms over and above that of the sham injection, but a second study showed no more effect for botulinum toxin than for the sham injection, with a benign natural history reported in both cohorts [70, 71]. It thus seems questionable whether an invasive treatment such as POEM is justified in patients with spastic motility disorders, given this benign natural history and lack of evidence on efficacy and safety from methodologically sound studies. In exceptional cases, however, for instance in patients with persisting severe dysphagia with profound manometric abnormalities combined with weight loss, POEM might be appropriate given the lack of effectiveness of the other (medical) therapeutic options available.

## 3.2 Botulinum toxin injection

### 3.2.1 Technicality and dosing

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends that botulinum toxin injection should be performed using 100 units\* of the toxin diluted in preservative-free saline that is injected in aliquots of 0.5–1 mL using an injection needle in forward view just above the squamocolumnar junction in at least four quadrants.
> Strong recommendation, high quality of evidence, level of agreement 100%.

The standard approach is to inject 100 units\* of the toxin, usually diluted in preservative-free saline and injected in aliquots of 0.5–1 mL, using an injection needle just above the squamocolumnar junction in at least four quadrants [72]. An alternative approach, with similar safety, involves the injection of botulinum toxin aliquots of 0.5 mL into four quadrants of the LES with the endoscope in a retroflexed position and then into each quadrant from direct vision [73].

Although the initial (1 month) response rate is high (> 75%), the therapeutic effect of repeated treatments substantially reduces over time and about half of patients required further injections at intervals of 6–24 months [73–80]. Moreover, there is some evidence that multiple treatments with botulinum toxin injection can induce an inflammatory and subsequently fibrotic reaction, which in turn might compromise the efficacy of subsequent surgical or endoscopic treatment [80–86]. In contrast, recent retrospective studies suggest that prior botulinum toxin treatment does not influence the results of POEM [27, 87]. Serious side effects are uncommon, although there is a 16%–25% rate of developing chest pain and rare complications, such as mediastinitis and allergic reactions related to egg protein.

In a multicenter randomized trial, injection of 50, 100, and 200 units of botulinum toxin did not result in different short-

\* Dosing based on Botox. Other brands might require an adjusted dosing as the units are not equivalent between the brands.

term responses when assessing symptoms or LES pressure 1 month after injection [77]. However, performing two injections of 100 units 1 month apart led to the best long-term clinical response, with 68 % of patients being in clinical remission after 2 years. In addition, in a systematic review, a dose of 100 units of botulinum toxin was used most frequently [88]. Therefore, we recommend using a dose of 100 units of botulinum toxin, as there appears to be no benefit from injecting higher doses.

### 3.2.2 Botulinum toxin in type III achalasia

In type III achalasia, botulinum toxin is the treatment modality with by far the worst outcomes (overall 21 %) according to the most recent meta-analysis published by Andolfi and colleagues [89]. Indeed, different retrospective studies evaluating the role of botulinum injection in type III achalasia observed a success rate ranging from 0 to 73 % [90–93]. In particular, Marjoux and co-workers found that clinical response was similar whether botulinum toxin was injected in the LES alone (n = 6), in the distal esophagus alone (n = 5), or at both locations (n = 5) [93]. However, the numbers from such studies are small and might not be representative.

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE does not suggest the routine injection of botulinum toxin in the esophageal body, in addition to injection in the LES, for patients with type III achalasia.
> Weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence, level of agreement 78.6%.

### 3.2.3 Botulinum toxin in spastic esophageal motility disorders other than achalasia

Most studies on the use of botulinum toxin in esophageal motility disorders other than achalasia are retrospective in nature and describe a 33 %–72 % clinical response rate [93–95]. In a recent sham-controlled trial, however, manometric improvement occurred at 3 months in about 6/10 patients in the sham group, therefore suggesting there is an unpredictable disease course in hypercontractile esophageal motility disorders [70].

Two RCTs involving botulinum toxin for hypercontractile esophageal motility disorders have been performed. Vanuytsel et al. found a significant clinical and manometric improvement following injection of 100 units of botulinum toxin at 2 and 7 cm above the LES in a population of patients with dysphagia [71]. The more recent RCT by Mion et al. mentioned previously found a similar 30 % clinical improvement in both the treated and sham groups with chest pain being the predominant symptom [70].

Hence, the evidence supporting the use of botulinum toxin injection as a treatment for non-achalasia esophageal motility disorders is inconsistent. However, if botulinum toxin is used for this indication, dysphagia is probably the target symptom and there are data to advocate injection into the distal esophagus in conjunction with botulinum toxin injection into the LES [71, 96].

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends against the routine use of botulinum toxin injections to treat patients with non-achalasia hypercontractile esophageal motility disorders (Jackhammer esophagus, distal esophageal spasm). However, if, in individual patients, endoscopic injection of botulinum toxin is chosen, ESGE recommends performing injections into four quadrants of the LES and in the lower third of the esophagus.
> Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 78.6%.

## 3.3 Balloon dilation

### 3.3.1 Technical aspects

Dilation is a frequently used treatment option for symptomatic patients with achalasia. In the vast majority of published series, an air-filled balloon is used (pneumatic dilation) [76, 97–106]. A relatively low pressure is usually required for the gentle, safe, and gradual dilation of the LES. There are no data to suggest that the use of water- or contrast-filled balloons can offer more reliable, safe, or effective dilations [107].

Published dilation protocols vary substantially in terms of balloon pressure targets, stepwise insufflation, and duration of inflation [108]. Commonly, balloons are initially inflated with a low pressure (e.g. 3 psi) across the esophagogastric junction (EGJ). When a waist is seen, the balloon is further inflated until a pressure of 6–12 psi is reached or until the waist at the midpoint of the balloon is effaced. Studies have also described variable minimum duration inflation times, ranging between 6 and 180 seconds [108]. An RCT, using 30-mm balloons, compared two dilation protocols: 60 seconds at 10 psi vs. 6 seconds at 10 psi [105]. No differences with regard to outcome and perforation rate were observed between the two groups. In the European Achalasia Trial, balloons were dilated at 5 psi for 1 minute and then again at 8 psi for an additional minute [99]. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis confirms that inflation time and pressure do not seem to influence the treatment efficacy or perforation risk [108].

In view of the lack of clarity in the literature, we suggest slowly inflating balloons at least until the disappearance of the waist on fluoroscopy, but that the maximum nominal pressure should not be exceeded.

The accurate positioning of the pneumatic device across the EGJ is essential and should be carefully reaffirmed during the procedure because, during inflation, the balloon can easily migrate above or below the junction, making the procedure inefficacious and risking unnecessary trauma. The achalasia balloons have radiopaque markers to control their positioning during fluoroscopy. Under fluoroscopic guidance, accurate positioning of the dilator during the inflation can also be assured by observing the temporary appearance of a waist in the balloon that corresponds to the position of the EGJ. In

some series, however, dilation was performed under direct endoscopic vision rather than under fluoroscopic guidance [109, 110]; the endoscope is passed alongside the pneumatic balloon catheter to ensure its accurate positioning. These non-randomized studies report results that are similar to fluoroscopic-guided pneumatic dilation techniques. However, in line with the recent RCTs and the largest case series and comparative trials, and to ensure adequate effacement of the waist, we recommend that the fluoroscopic technique should be the preferred method.

## 3.3.2 Dilation protocol

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends the use of a graded pneumatic dilation protocol in achalasia, starting with a 30-mm dilation and followed by a 35-mm dilation at a planned interval of 2–4 weeks, with a subsequent 40-mm dilation when there is insufficient relief, over both a single balloon dilation procedure or the use of a larger balloon from the outset.
> Strong recommendation, high quality of evidence, level of agreement 100%.

Comparative and cohort trials have shown repeatedly that a single dilation leads to an improved symptom profile and that progressing to a larger diameter balloon can salvage many of the patients who have persistent or recurrent symptoms [106, 111–114]. It became apparent that, the bigger the balloon, the better the outcome [115, 116]. On the other hand, the use of bigger balloons, particularly during the initial dilation, is associated with higher perforation rates. In an RCT, Boeckxstaens et al. found that, when dilations began at 35 mm, the perforation rate was as high as 31% (4 of the first 13 patients) but, when the initial diameter was reduced to 30 mm, followed a few weeks later by the next level diameter, the perforation rate dropped to 4% overall (4/95 patients) [117]. In the subsequent follow-up study of the same cohort at 5 years, the perforation rate was defined as 2% per procedure [118]. A very recent meta-analysis, evaluating 10 high quality studies including 643 patients, showed that perforations occurred most often during initial dilations and significantly more often using a 35-mm balloon than using a 30-mm balloon (3.2% vs. 1.0%) [108]. A subsequent 35-mm dilation was safer than an initial dilation to 35 mm (0.97% vs. 9.3% perforations). We therefore recommend always starting with an initial 30-mm dilation in a previously untreated patient.

In a comparative trial, Vela et al. showed that at 6 months and 6 years after therapy, when compared with surgery, outcomes following a single dilation were clearly inferior. On the other hand, with graded dilation, whereby the procedure was repeated with a bigger diameter balloon at a planned subsequent interval, symptomatic outcomes became equivalent to surgery [119]. The aforementioned study by Boeckxstaens et al. confirmed the equivalent efficacy of graded balloon dilation and LHM [117, 118]. Of note, in this study, 25% of patients required a repeat dilation series within 5 years [118].

It is therefore now clear that, where dilations are considered as a therapeutic option, unless there is a contraindication, graded dilations should be the recommended regimen, beginning at 30 mm then 35 mm, and then eventually 40 mm if symptoms persist, at a planned interval of 2–4 weeks. Furthermore, as long as symptoms do not recur within the same year, repeating the dilation series over subsequent years should not be considered a failure of therapy, but part of the course of the disease management.

## 3.3.3 Postoperative care

There is variability in the published series with regard to the postoperative care after pneumatic esophageal dilation. Older published series described the routine use of a Gastrografin esophagram a few hours after the procedure to rule out immediate complications [76, 109, 111]. Subsequent publications advocated the use of the esophagram only in patients with suspected perforation [104, 107]. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy performed immediately after the balloon dilation, when the patient is still sedated, is likely to be the most practical and useful method to rule out possible immediate complications and guarantee the safety of early oral feeding [106].

Perforation is the most common adverse event that can occur after pneumatic dilation. The presentation varies and therapy should be customized according to the clinical needs [108]. Conservative management, including fluid replacement, antibiotics, and nil-per-os prescription, can be proposed as the initial management in stable patients. When there is a large full-thickness breach, rapid deterioration in the clinical status, or evidence of fluid collections or gas on CT scanning, surgery should be considered [103]. Standard clips and OTSCs, as well as fully covered self-expandable metal stents (SEMSs), have been used for the management of perforations in some case series and can be proposed as an alternative to surgery if there are no large collections on cross-sectional imaging and the breach is recognized immediately [103, 120].

No recommendations can be made with regard to the use of acid-reducing therapy following dilation. Furthermore, the literature does not help determine the most appropriate timeline to resume oral intake. In the majority of publications, liquid diet was allowed 2–8 hours after dilation [98, 101, 103]. We recommend that, in asymptomatic patients in whom there is no suspicion of a full-thickness tear, a soft/normal diet can be initiated on the same day or the day after the procedure.

Immediate or delayed bleeding is a very rare complication after pneumatic dilation and, in the majority of cases, tends to terminate spontaneously and does not require additional endoscopic intervention or other treatments [107, 109]. Careful observation, fluid replacement, and clinical support are advisable.

## 3.4 Deciding on treatment options for achalasia

To date, in achalasia, studies have not found any of the three primary definitive treatment options (repeated series of pneumatic dilations, LHM, or POEM) to be clearly superior.

The European Achalasia Trial, an RCT comparing pneumatic dilation and LHM, showed graded dilation to be equivalent to LHM at 2 and 5 years [117, 118]. To reduce the likelihood and severity of reflux, a partial Dor (anterior) or Toupet (posterior) fundoplication almost always follows LHM [121, 122]. By doing this, an overall reflux risk of 15 % and 23 % was observed in patients following pneumatic dilation and LHM, respectively (P = 0.28) [117]. It should be stressed that, in this trial, re-dilation was allowed if there was symptom recurrence and thus multiple dilation series were compared with, and were equivalent to, a single LHM.

Studies have suggested POEM to be on a par with both graded dilation series and LHM in terms of outcomes and complication rates [123, 124], albeit with a predilection to reflux disease [10, 123, 125, 126]. On the other hand, POEM appears to be superior to LHM for treating type III achalasia, with success rates of 98 % vs. 80 %, respectively [127]; however, an RCT proving this benefit is lacking.

Two recent RCTs assessed the outcomes following POEM in myotomy-naïve patients with achalasia. The first trial, comparing POEM to pneumatic dilation, showed in terms of subjective response (Eckardt score ≤ 3) that POEM was much more effective than a single series of pneumatic dilations after 2 years (92% vs. 54%; P < 0.01) [31]. On the other hand, reflux esophagitis was more likely in the POEM group than in those treated by pneumatic dilation (41 % vs. 7 %, respectively; P = 0.002); following POEM, 49 % of patients had reflux esophagitis at 1 year, with the majority of them having grade A esophagitis when tested off PPIs. It should be noted that this study showed markedly reduced outcomes following pneumatic dilation when compared to other comparative and randomized studies [117–119], likely because the dilation protocol was less aggressive.

The second RCT compared POEM with LHM [33]. This study showed that at 2 years there was no difference in the subjective outcome (Eckardt score ≤ 3) following either POEM or LHM (83 % vs. 81.7 %). While reflux esophagitis 2 years after the procedure was evident in 44 % of patients following POEM and 29 % following LHM; grade C/D esophagitis was seen in only 5 % of patients following POEM and 7 % following LHM. Furthermore, most patients with reflux symptoms following achalasia therapy respond very well to acid-reducing therapy [128].

Both comparative and randomized studies thus far imply that therapy decisions should be based on local/operator expertise and patient choice. Caveats however are that: (i) pneumatic dilation is undertaken in a graded fashion as routine and further pneumatic dilation is permitted in subsequent years if required, so patients should be informed that this approach implies multiple treatments over the course of years; (ii) acid-reducing therapy is permitted for those post-POEM who might have an increased risk of reflux, albeit this is mild in the majority of patients; and (iii) in type III achalasia, there might be a preference for POEM over pneumatic dilation or LHM.

# 4 Gastroparesis

Gastroparesis is a syndrome defined as delayed gastric emptying in the absence of mechanical obstruction in patients with symptoms that include early satiety, postprandial fullness, nausea, vomiting, bloating, and abdominal pain. Patients may also show weight loss and poor nutritional status. The most common etiologies of gastroparesis include idiopathic, diabetic, and post-surgical; other causes comprise neurological, infectious, and infiltrative disorders. Multiple pathophysiological factors may play a role in the development of gastroparesis, such as abnormal function of the gastric smooth muscle, enteric and extrinsic autonomic nerves, and the interstitial cells of Cajal. Traditionally, gastroparesis has been considered to be a disorder principally caused by gastric hypomotility. Besides hypomotility, pylorospasm is recognized as another significant pathophysiological factor. Endoscopic treatments targeting the pyloric muscle in order to open up the pylorus may provide a therapeutic effect.

In patients with refractory gastroparesis, in whom conservative measures have not been effective, endoscopic therapies may be considered. Although antral hypomotility might play a role in patients with symptomatic gastroparesis, endoscopic therapies are only able to target the pyloric sphincter. Endoscopic methods include intrapyloric botulinum toxin injection, balloon dilation, stenting, and gastric peroral endoscopic myotomy (G-POEM). G-POEM is a novel endoscopic method based on the principle of submucosal tunneling. At present, indications for pylorus-targeted therapies have not been clearly defined because a validated and widely accessible method for assessing pyloric function is missing. Measurement of pyloric distensibility (Endoflip technology) may be a promising diagnostic approach in the near future.

## 4.1 Indications for pylorus-directed endoscopic therapy

Endoscopic pylorus-targeted therapies should only be considered in patients with symptomatic gastroparesis documented by a validated gastric emptying test (gastric scintigraphy, breath test, motility capsule). Symptoms should have been refractory to conservative measures (diet) and medical therapy for at least 6 months.

At present, there is no generally accepted method for the diagnosis of pylorospasm. Assessment of the pyloric tonus during diagnostic endoscopy alone (widely opened pylorus, pin-

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends that endoscopic pylorus-directed therapy should be considered only in patients with symptoms suggestive of gastroparesis in combination with objective proof of delayed gastric emptying using a validated test, and only when medical therapy has failed.
> Strong recommendation, very low quality of evidence, level of agreement 100%.

point pylorus, resistance to passing the endoscope through the pylorus) is subjective, and there are no data to support that endoscopists can reliably assess "pylorospasm" based on these endoscopic features.

Four prospective studies, including a limited number of patients (20–35), are currently available and report the use of the new Endoflip system to assess pyloric distensibility in patients with gastroparesis. Three of them assessed the distensibility before (and one study also after) treatment by balloon dilation, botulinum toxin injection, or G-POEM [129–132]. These four studies concur in showing a correlation between pyloric distensibility at 40 and 50 mL and the symptom score, and an improved clinical success when treating patients with impaired pyloric distensibility, defined as < 10 mm²/mmHg at 40 mL in sedated patients. However, no prospective validation of this cutoff value has been performed, and ESGE considers these data to be preliminary. Future studies are needed before pyloric distensibility measurement can be advised to select patients for pylorus-directed therapy.

Antral hypomotility is usually present in patients with gastroparesis and may be diagnosed by antroduodenal manometry [133, 134]. However, ESGE does not recommend this test for the selection of patients for pylorus-directed therapies as there are no data on its ability to predict response to therapy. Moreover, antroduodenal manometry is not widely available [135]. Electrogastrography is not a reliable method for diagnosing pylorospasm. ESGE therefore does not recommend it for selecting patients for pylorus-targeted therapies [135].

## 4.2 Intrapyloric botulinum toxin

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends against the use of botulinum toxin injection in the treatment of unselected patients with gastroparesis.
> Strong recommendation, high quality of evidence, level of agreement 92.9%

Although most retrospective studies have suggested a clinical benefit of intrapyloric botulinum toxin injection in patients with refractory gastroparesis (50%–77% short-term clinical improvement [136]), the clinical improvement was not different to that seen with placebo treatment (saline injection) in two well-conducted RCTs, whichever dose of botulinum toxin was used (100 or 200 units\*) [137, 138]. Of note, no adverse events associated with intrapyloric botulinum toxin injection were reported in either of the two studies, and several experts feel that a subset of patients with gastroparesis might respond favorably to this treatment, albeit temporarily. Hence, if intrapyloric botulinum toxin injection is considered, based on an individual decision, a dose of 100 units should be used, because the results of the two RCTs do not support the use of higher doses of botulinum toxin.

\* Dosing based on Botox. Other brands might require an adjusted dosing as the units are not equivalent between the brands.

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends against the use of botulinum toxin injection as the screening test to select patients for endoscopic pyloromyotomy or for other pylorus-directed therapies.
> Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 94.1%.

Only one small retrospective study has assessed the role of botulinum toxin injection as a predictor for treatment success after endoscopic pyloromyotomy [139]. Patients responding to botulinum toxin tended to respond better to G-POEM: of five patients who responded to botulinum toxin injection, three (60%) responded to G-POEM, whereas of three patients not responding to botulinum toxin injection, only one (33%) responded to G-POEM. Other studies have used a similar approach by selecting patients for endoscopic pyloromyotomy based on their response to botulinum toxin injection [140, 141]. Although they showed significant improvement in post-procedural symptom score (gastroparesis cardinal symptom index [GCSI]) and gastric emptying, the overall clinical response rate was similar to other studies where the selection of patients was not based on the effect of botulinum toxin injection. Moreover, there was no direct comparison of patients who received botulinum toxin injection vs. those who did not.

Taking into account that: (i) botulinum toxin injection carries (at least theoretically) risk of submucosal fibrosis (making the subsequent endoscopic pyloromyotomy more difficult); (ii) the benefit of botulinum toxin injection for treatment of gastroparesis is controversial (see above); and (iii) there are no data reliably documenting the predictive role of botulinum toxin injection to select patients for pylorus-directed therapies, this approach cannot be recommended.

## 4.3 Endoscopic pyloric balloon dilation

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE suggests not to use balloon dilation in the treatment of unselected patients with gastroparesis.
> Weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence, level of agreement 94.1%.

Balloon dilation of the pylorus has been mostly reported in retrospective series. Pylorospasm following esophagectomy or pylorus-preserving gastrectomy was diagnosed by endoscopy or radiology in patients with symptoms suggestive of gastroparesis [142–147]. Pyloric dilation was safe and symptomatic improvement was observed in the majority of patients in the short term, and dilation was repeated if recurrence occurred.

Bae et al. showed a satisfactory clinical effect in 73 % of patients after almost 2 years [145].

Only one prospective study has assessed the efficacy of hydraulic balloon dilation (2-cm balloon inflated at 6 atm) in 10 patients with gastroparesis and with low pyloric compliance (< 10 mm²/mmHg) [130]. The follow-up after dilation was very short (10 days). At this point after pyloric dilation, fasting pyloric compliance had increased in all patients (from 7.4 ± 0.4 to 20.1 ± 4.9 mm²/mmHg), gastric emptying half-time had accelerated in 7/8 patients, and quality of life score had improved. No prospective data with long-term outcomes are available with regard to pyloric balloon dilation.

If balloon dilation is considered for patients with gastroparesis/pylorospasm, preferably post-surgical, both hydraulic dilation with through-the-scope 20-mm balloons and pneumatic dilation with a 30-mm balloon (Rigiflex) can be used following the manufacturer's instructions [130, 143, 144, 146, 147]. Inflation should be slow (2 minutes) and dilation should last for 1–2 minutes. In the study by Maus et al., pneumatic dilation using the 30-mm Rigiflex balloon was associated with a reduced need for redilation when compared with hydraulic dilation with a 20-mm balloon, with no differences in adverse events [146]. However, available data are retrospective and therefore insufficient to favor any type of balloon.

## 4.4 Transpyloric stenting

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends against the use of transpyloric stenting in the treatment of gastroparesis.
> Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 100 %.

A total of 33 patients with gastroparesis have been treated by transpyloric placement of fully covered esophageal SEMSs in one retrospective study and in one small retrospective case series [148, 149]. Most of the stents were anchored to the gastric wall using clips or endoscopic sutures. Symptomatic relief was present in 75 % of patients and a considerable proportion of patients had normalized or at least improved gastric emptying studies. Stents remained in situ for a mean of 67 days and stent migration (either proximal or distal) occurred following 59 % of the procedures (100 % in patients without anchoring, 48 % in patients with anchoring using endoscopic sutures).

Given the merely temporary effect, need for stent removal, potential risk of adverse events (especially distal migration with the risk of intestinal obstruction), very high rate of migration, lack of prospective data, and availability of other pylorus-directed therapies, ESGE recommends against transpyloric stenting as a therapeutic option for patients with gastroparesis/pylorospasm.

## 4.5 Gastric peroral endoscopic myotomy (G-POEM)

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends consideration of G-POEM in carefully selected patients only, because it is an emerging procedure with limited data on effectiveness, safety, and durability. G-POEM should be performed in expert centers only, preferably in the context of a clinical trial.
> Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 100 %.

G-POEM seems a promising method but data on its effectiveness and safety are very limited with only one prospective study published so far [129]. Only patients with pylorospasm should logically be good candidates for the procedure and, as reliable methods to differentiate between patients with gastroparesis, with or without a pylorospasm, are hitherto lacking, optimal patient selection is hampered. Endoflip technology might be a tool for the selection of appropriate patients in the future, but more research is needed.

Short-term clinical success at 3 months (defined as a significant improvement in GCSI) has been reported in 73 %–90 % of patients with refractory gastroparesis undergoing G-POEM [150]. Long-term data are missing and the recurrence rate is not known. Some studies have reported a longer follow-up and the effect seemed to wane in time [151]. In one study, the success rate was lower in patients with diabetic gastroparesis compared with other etiologies [152], most of the studies, however, did not find differences among the varying etiologies.

G-POEM seems safe, serious adverse events are rare, and no mortality has been reported so far. Only one case of gastric perforation necessitating surgery has recently been described [153]. Nevertheless, care should be taken with regard to serosal perforation (leak of gastric content) and post-procedural ulcers. G-POEM appears safer compared with laparoscopic pyloroplasty [154].

### 4.5.1 Use of antibiotics and CO₂

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends the use of prophylactic antibiotics during G-POEM. The choice and duration of antibiotics should be adapted according to national or local protocols.
> Strong recommendation, very low quality of evidence, level of agreement 88.2 %.

No articles have specifically addressed the use of perioperative systemic antibiotics during G-POEM. G-POEM can potentially induce translocation of bacteria from the digestive tract to the peritoneal space, especially if a serosal perforation occurs during myotomy. ESGE therefore recommends the pro-

---

Weusten Bas L.A.M. et al. Endoscopic management of GI motility disorders, part 1 … Endoscopy 2020; 52: 498–515

phylactic administration of systemic antibiotics prior to G-POEM because it should be considered a potentially septic intervention. The choice of antibiotics should be guided by the current national/local guidelines for gastric or abdominal surgery.

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends against local application of antibiotics prior to the procedure (stomach, esophagus, and/or oral cavity) or during the procedure (submucosal tunnel).
> Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 94.1 %.

G-POEM seems very safe in terms of infectious complications. The majority of studies did not use either gastric (or esophageal/oral cavity) lavage or lavage of the submucosal tunnel with antibiotics. Local antibiotics have been used in only two published studies [139, 155]. Therefore, such a lavage seems unnecessary, even though no study has specifically addressed this issue. As the principle of G-POEM is similar to POEM, one retrospective study may serve as the only available piece of evidence against a meaningful role of gentamicin submucosal lavage: in this retrospective study examining patients undergoing POEM for achalasia [42], no differences were found between patients with and without antibiotic lavage in terms of infectious complications (see Section 3.1.7).

G-POEM should always be performed with CO₂ insufflation. The lowest possible insufflation force should be used to prevent CO₂-related adverse events; however, in contrast to POEM, only a few patients have required puncture of a capnoperitoneum.

### 4.5.2 Mucosal incision and closure

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE recommends the submucosal tunnel created during the G-POEM procedure should be at least 3 cm in length to secure a safe overlap of the myotomy site by intact mucosa.
> Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 92.9 %.

Mucosal incisions are usually 1.5 – 2 cm in length and may be longitudinal or transverse. Most endoscopic pyloromyotomies have been performed using the posterior or greater curvature approaches. There are no data about the advantages or disadvantages of different locations (posterior vs. anterior vs. greater curvature vs. lesser curvature) and shapes (transverse vs. longitudinal) of tunnel entry. The submucosal tunnel should not be too short in case mucosal tearing occurs at the site of the mucosal incision (longitudinal in particular), meaning the mucosa might not protect the myotomy site and leakage of gastric contents through the stomach wall could occur.

Closure of the mucosal entry may be performed using endoclips or a suturing device. At present, there are no published studies comparing different closure methods but one prospective study is ongoing [156]. No major problems with closure have been reported so far.

### 4.5.3 Length of myotomy

> **RECOMMENDATION**
>
> ESGE suggests the length of myotomy should be 2 – 3 cm and should include the pyloric muscle up to its termination in the duodenal bulb.
> Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence, level of agreement 100 %.

There are no data assessing the effectiveness and safety of G-POEM in terms of myotomy length. No clinical study has compared different myotomy lengths. Most studies have reported the mean length of pyloromyotomy, with the length varying between 1 and 3 cm. However, no study has specifically described the method for how the length was measured. Therefore, these data should be taken into consideration with care. A longer myotomy (more than 3 cm) might hypothetically lead to a worsening of antral hypomotility and should be avoided. A shorter myotomy (less than 2 cm) might not be sufficient to provide a good effect.

One experimental ex vivo study on a porcine ex vivo stomach assessed the appropriate length of pyloromyotomy [157]. Four myotomy lengths (1, 2, 3, and 4 cm) were compared in terms of pyloric distensibility. The most appropriate myotomy length was 3 cm in the large stomach (similar to an adult's) and 2 cm in the small stomach (pediatric equivalent). The authors found that the change in the mean distending pyloric diameter was significantly larger after the 3-cm and 4-cm incisions compared with the 1-cm incision, but there was no statistically significant difference between the 3-cm and 4-cm myotomies.

### 4.5.4 Knives and electrosurgical settings

Different knives are used for G-POEM (HybridKnife, TT-knife, Insulated Tip knife [IT-knife], HookKnife). There is no evidence for the superiority of any of these knives in terms of effectiveness or safety. Selection of a knife should reflect the endoscopist's experience and preference.

Most of the studies used Endocut Q mode (ERBE VIO electrosurgical unit) for incision and spray coagulation mode for tunneling and myotomy. Other settings (dry cut, swift or soft coagulation) have also been used. For electrosurgical units from other manufacturers, the recommended settings according to the indications for use should be followed.

## 4.6 Postoperative care

There are no guideline recommendations on follow-up after gastroparesis treatment. If the pylorus-directed therapy is performed in an ambulatory setting (botulinum toxin injection, dilation), a post-interventional clinical examination should be

---

510 Weusten Bas L.A.M. et al. Endoscopic management of GI motility disorders, part 1 … Endoscopy 2020; 52: 498–515

performed immediately after the intervention to exclude adverse events (perforation). Surveillance with monitoring for signs of perforation and vital parameters for at least 1 hour is recommended. A routine radiographic check is not recommended after dilation of the pylorus because the rate of adverse events is quite low [158]. The same monitoring is also recommended in patients who are hospitalized after the intervention (usually dilation). Fluids can be given orally, 2–4 hours after the procedure, and a soft diet can start the following day.

G-POEM should be performed in hospitalized patients because the risk of severe complications cannot be ruled out. Prior to G-POEM, an upper GI endoscopy should be performed to exclude an ulcer and clean the stomach of food residues. On postoperative day 1, a routine upper GI fluoroscopy (with a water-soluble contrast) or an endoscopy can be considered to exclude a leak or confirm secure closure of an incision, but evidence from the literature is lacking. If no complications occur, patients may be discharged on postoperative day 1 and slowly restart feeding (liquid diet on postoperative day 1, soft diet starting on postoperative day 2). Treatment with a PPI is necessary during and after G-POEM to prevent ulceration. Prior to and during the procedure, PPIs should be given intravenously, after restarting oral intake, they can be administered orally twice daily for at least 4 weeks.

After G-POEM, being the most invasive yet still experimental therapy, proper documentation of all relevant parameters – preferably in the context of an Institutional Review Board (IRB)-supervised study protocol – is crucial. Idiopathic and diabetic gastroparesis should be studied separately. Symptoms (before, as well as after the procedure) should be assessed using a validated symptom score, and this is an indispensable requirement for all clinical studies. The GCSI is widely used and has been validated [159]. The GCSI is a component of the Patient Assessment of Upper Gastrointestinal Symptom Severity (PAGI-SYM) score, which is a self-reported instrument for patients suffering from gastroparesis, dyspepsia, and GERD [160].

To evaluate the change of gastric emptying after endoscopic intervention, given the paucity of data with regard to all types of endoscopic therapy (botulinum toxin, dilation, G-POEM), we advocate a validated gastric emptying test (scintigraphy, breath test, motility capsule) 3–6 months after a pylorus-directed therapy. In patients with pre-procedural pyloric distensibility testing, a post-procedural measurement may also be recommended to further document the pathophysiological effect of these interventions.

## Disclaimer

The legal disclaimer for ESGE guidelines [2] applies to this Guideline.

## Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully thank Dr. M. Pioche of the Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Lyon and Dr. T. Beyna of the Evangelisches Krankenhaus, Duesseldorf for their valuable comments on the manuscript.

Lastly, we would like to thank Claire Guy for arranging the Delphi procedure and Pauline Rocheteau and Francoise Heidenreich for organizing all the meetings and telephone conferences for the Guideline.

## Competing interests

A.J. Bredenoord has received speaker's fees from MMS, Diversatek, and Medtronics (ongoing). P. Familiari received speaker's fees from Olympus (October 2019). H. Neumann has provided consultancy services to Fujifilm, Pentax, Motus GI, Boston Scientific, and Cook Medical (2012 to present). D. Pohl has provided consultancy services to Medtronic (2018 to present). R. Tutuian has provided consultancy services and educational programs to Laborie/MMS (2010 to present). J.E. van Hooft has received lecture fees from Medtronics (2014–2015) and consultancy fees from Boston Scientific (2014–2017); her department has received research grants from Cook Medical (2014–2018) and Abbott (2014–2017). D. von Renteln has received research funding from Pendopharm (2016–2019), Ventage and Pentax (2018–2019), ERBE (2019 to present), and Boston Scientific (2020), and speaker's fees from Boston Scientific (2018–2020) and ERBE (2020).

M. Barret, J.-M. Gonzalez, S. Ishaq, V. Lorenzo-Zúñiga, H. Louis, J. Martinek, F. Prat, E. Savarino, R. Sweis, J. Tack, S. van Meer, and B.L.A.M. Weusten declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## References

[1] Atkins D, Best D, Briss P et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2004; 328: 1490

[2] Dumonceau JM, Hassan C, Riphaus A et al. European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) guideline development policy. Endoscopy 2012; 44: 626–629

[3] Linstone HA, Turoff M. The Delphi Method: Techniques and Applications. 2002. Available from: https://web.njit.edu/~turoff/pubs/delphibook/index.html Accessed: 9 April 2020

[4] Samo S, Carlson DA, Gregory DL et al. Incidence and prevalence of achalasia in central Chicago, 2004–2014, since the widespread use of high-resolution manometry. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017; 15: 366–373

[5] Sadowski DC, Ackah F, Jiang B et al. Achalasia: incidence, prevalence and survival. A population-based study. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2010; 22: e256–e261

[6] Jeon HH, Kim J-H, Youn YH et al. Clinical characteristics of patients with untreated achalasia. J Neurogastroenterol Motil 2017; 23: 378–384

[7] Kahrilas PJ, Bredenoord AJ, Fox M et al. The Chicago classification of esophageal motility disorders, v3.0. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2015; 27: 160–174

[8] Oude Nijhuis RAB, Zaninotto G, Roman S et al. European guideline on achalasia: United European Gastroenterology and European Society of Neurogastroenterology and Motility recommendations. United European Gastroenterol J 2020; 8: 13–33

[9] Inoue H, Minami H, Kobayashi Y et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) for esophageal achalasia. Endoscopy 2010; 42: 265–271

[10] von Renteln D, Inoue H, Minami H et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy for the treatment of achalasia: a prospective single center study. Am J Gastroenterol 2012; 107: 411–417

[11] Familiari P, Gigante G, Marchese M et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy for esophageal achalasia. Outcomes of the first 100 patients with short-term follow-up. Ann Surg 2016; 263: 82–87

# Guideline

## References

[12] Shiwaku H, Inoue H, Yamashita K et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy for esophageal achalasia: outcomes of the first over 100 patients with short-term follow-up. Surg Endosc 2016; 30: 4817–4826

[13] Zhang X, Li Q, Xu M et al. Major perioperative adverse events of peroral endoscopic myotomy: a systematic 5-year analysis. Endoscopy 2016; 48: 967–978

[14] Classen DC, Evans RS, Pestotnik SL et al. The timing of prophylactic administration of antibiotics and the risk of surgical-wound infection. NEJM 1992; 326: 281–286

[15] Special issue: The SENIC Project. Appendix E: algorithms for diagnosing infections. Am J Epidemiol 1980; 111: 635–643

[16] Maselli R, Oliva A, Attardo S et al. Risk of microbial translocation in patients undergoing per-oral endoscopic myotomy for achalasia. Preliminary results. Dig Liver Dis 2018; 50: e183–e184

[17] Zhu B-Q, Cai M-Y, Zhang X-C et al. Benefit of preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis for peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM): A randomized controlled trial. Gastrointest Endosc 2017; 85: AB184–AB185

[18] Zhai Y, Linghu E, Li H et al. Is preoperative antibiotics necessary for infection prevention before peroral endoscopic myotomy. Am J Gastroenterol 2013; 108: S587

[19] Stavropoulos SN, Modayil RJ, Friedel D et al. The International Per Oral Endoscopic Myotomy Survey (IPOEMS): a snapshot of the global POEM experience. Surg Endosc 2013; 27: 3322–3338

[20] Ramchandani M, Nabi Z, Reddy DN et al. Outcomes of anterior myotomy versus posterior myotomy during POEM: a randomized pilot study. Endosc Int Open 2018; 06: E190–E198

[21] Tan Y, Lv L, Wang X et al. Efficacy of anterior versus posterior peroral endoscopic myotomy for treating achalasia: a randomized, prospective study. Gastrointest Endosc 2018; 88: 46–54

[22] Khashab MA, Sanaei O, Rivory J et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy: anterior versus posterior approach: a randomized single-blinded clinical trial. Gastrointest Endosc 2020; 91: 288–297.e7

[23] de Santiago ER, Mohammed N, Manolakis A et al. Anterior versus posterior myotomy during POEM for the treatment of achalasia: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis 2019; 28: 107–115

[24] Onimaru M, Inoue H, Ikeda H et al. Greater curvature myotomy is a safe and effective modified technique in per-oral endoscopic myotomy (with videos). Gastrointest Endosc 2015; 81: 1370–1377

[25] Fumagalli U, Rosati R, de Pascale S et al. Repeated surgical or endoscopic myotomy for recurrent dysphagia in patients after previous myotomy for achalasia. J Gastrointest Surg 2016; 20: 494–499

[26] Vigneswaran Y, Yetasook AK, Zhao J et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM): feasible as reoperation following Heller myotomy. J Gastrointest Surg 2014; 18: 1071–1076

[27] Orenstein SB, Raigani S, Wu YV et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) leads to similar results in patients with and without prior endoscopic or surgical therapy. Surg Endosc 2015; 29: 1064–1070

[28] Zhou PH, Li QL, Yao LQ et al. Peroral endoscopic remyotomy for failed Heller myotomy: a prospective single-center study. Endoscopy 2013; 45: 161–166

[29] Onimaru M, Inoue H, Ikeda H et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy is a viable option for failed surgical esophagocardiomyotomy instead of redo surgical Heller myotomy: a single center prospective study. J Am Coll Surg 2013; 217: 598–605

[30] Tyberg A, Seewald S, Sharaiha RZ et al. A multicenter international registry of redo per-oral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) after failed POEM. Gastrointest Endosc 2017; 85: 1208–1211

[31] Ponds FA, Fockens P, Lei A et al. Effect of peroral endoscopic myotomy vs pneumatic dilation on symptom severity and treatment outcomes among treatment-naive patients with achalasia. JAMA 2019; 322: 134

[32] Bakker OJ, van Brunschot S, van Santvoort HC et al. Early versus on-demand nasoenteric tube feeding in acute pancreatitis. NEJM 2014; 371: 1983–1993

[33] Werner YB, Hakanson B, Martinek J et al. Endoscopic or surgical myotomy in patients with idiopathic achalasia. NEJM 2019; 381: 2219–2229

[34] Teitelbaum EN, Sternbach JM, El Khoury R et al. The effect of incremental distal gastric myotomy lengths on EGJ distensibility during POEM for achalasia. Surg Endosc 2016; 30: 745–750

[35] Ramirez M, Zubieta C, Ciotola F et al. Per oral endoscopic myotomy vs. laparoscopic Heller myotomy, does gastric extension length matter? Surg Endosc 2018; 32: 282–288

[36] Wang X-H, Tan Y-Y, Zhu H-Y et al. Full-thickness myotomy is associated with higher rate of postoperative gastroesophageal reflux disease. World J Gastroenterol 2016; 22: 9419–9426

[37] Li Q-L, Chen W-F, Zhou P-H et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy for the treatment of achalasia: a clinical comparative study of endoscopic full-thickness and circular muscle myotomy. J Am Coll Surg 2013; 217: 442–451

[38] Duan T, Tan Y, Zhou J et al. A retrospective study of peroral endoscopic full-thickness myotomy in patients with severe achalasia. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech 2017; 27: 770–776

[39] Verlaan T, Ponds FAM, Bastiaansen BAJ et al. Single clips versus multi-firing clip device for closure of mucosal incisions after peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM). Endosc Int Open 2016; 4: E1052–E1056

[40] Pescarus R, Shlomovitz E, Sharata AM et al. Endoscopic suturing versus endoscopic clip closure of the mucosotomy during a per-oral endoscopic myotomy (POEM): a case–control study. Surg Endosc 2016; 30: 2132–2135

[41] Saxena P, Chavez YH, Valeshabad AK et al. An alternative method for mucosal flap closure during peroral endoscopic myotomy using an over-the-scope clipping device. Endoscopy 2013; 3: 579–581

[42] Bayer J, Vackova Z, Svecova H et al. Gentamicin submucosal lavage during peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM): a retrospective analysis. Surg Endosc 2018; 32: 300–306

[43] Cai M-Y, Zhou P, Yao L-Q et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy for idiopathic achalasia: randomized comparison of water-jet assisted versus conventional dissection technique. Surg Endosc 2014; 28: 1158–1165

[44] Tang X, Gong W, Deng Z et al. Comparison of conventional versus Hybrid knife peroral endoscopic myotomy methods for esophageal achalasia: a case–control study. Scand J Gastroenterol 2016; 51: 494–500

[45] Nabi Z, Ramchandani M, Chavan R et al. Outcome of peroral endoscopic myotomy in achalasia cardia: Experience with a new triangular knife. Saudi J Gastroenterol 2018; 24: 18–24

[46] Cai M, Zhou P, Yao L et al. Thoracic CT after peroral endoscopic myotomy for the treatment of achalasia. Gastrointest Endosc 2014; 80: 1046–1055

[47] Lu B, Li M, Hu Y et al. Effect of peroral esophageal myotomy for achalasia treatment: A Chinese study. World J Gastroenterol 2015; 21: 5622–5629

[48] Yang S, Zeng M, Zhang Z et al. Pneumomediastinum and pneumoperitoneum on computed tomography after peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM): postoperative changes or complications? Acta Radiol 2015; 56: 1216–1221

[49] El R, Ezra K, Joel NT et al. Evaluation of the need for routine esophagram after peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM). Surg Endosc 2016; 30: 2969–2974

[50] Martinek J, Svecova H, Vackova Z et al. Per-oral endoscopic myotomy (POEM): mid-term efficacy and safety. Surg Endosc 2018; 32: 1293–1302

---

512 Weusten Bas L.A.M. et al. Endoscopic management of GI motility disorders, part 1 … Endoscopy 2020; 52: 498–515

[51] Shiwaku H, Inoue H, Beppu R et al. Successful treatment of diffuse esophageal spasm by peroral endoscopic myotomy. Gastrointest Endosc 2013; 77: 149–150

[52] Louis H, Covas A, Coppens E et al. Distal esophageal spasm treated by peroral endoscopic myotomy. Am J Gastroenterol 2012; 107: 1926–1927

[53] Sugihara Y, Harada K, Kato R et al. Ten initial cases of peroral endoscopic myotomy for treatment of esophageal motility disorders at Okayama University Hospital. Acta Med Okayama 2018; 72: 99–104

[54] Khashab MA, Benias PC, Swanstrom LL. Endoscopic myotomy for foregut motility disorders. Gastroenterology 2018; 154: 1901–1910

[55] Sugihara Y, Harada K, Kato R et al. A case of diffuse esophageal spasm treated with peroral endoscopic myotomy. Acta Med Okayama 2018; 72: 595–600

[56] Sato H, Takeuchi M, Takahashi K et al. Nutcracker and jackhammer esophagus treatment: a three-case survey, including two novel cases of eosinophilic infiltration into the muscularis propria. Endoscopy 2015; 47: 855–857

[57] Kristensen HØ, Bjerregaard NC, Rask P et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) for nutcracker esophagus. Three cases with 12 months follow-up. Scand J Gastroenterol 2014; 49: 1285–1289

[58] Ramos RI, Guidi M, Kakisu MH et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy in pediatric jackhammer esophagus. Rev Esp Enferm Dig 2018; 110: 464–465

[59] Dawod E, Saumoy M, Xu M et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) in jackhammer esophagus: a trick of the trade. Endoscopy 2017; 49: E254–E255

[60] Bechara R, Ikeda H, Inoue H. Peroral endoscopic myotomy for Jackhammer esophagus: to cut or not to cut the lower esophageal sphincter. Endosc Int Open 2016; 04: E585–E588

[61] Ko WJ, Lee BM, Park WY et al. Jackhammer esophagus treated by a peroral endoscopic myotomy. Korean J Gastroenterol 2014; 64: 370–374

[62] Sharata A, Kurian AA, Dunst CM et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) is safe and effective in the setting of prior endoscopic intervention. J Gastrointest Surg 2013; 17: 1188–1192

[63] Khashab MA, Messallam AA, Onimaru M et al. International multicenter experience with peroral endoscopic myotomy for the treatment of spastic esophageal disorders refractory to medical therapy (with video). Gastrointest Endosc 2015; 81: 1170–1177

[64] Minami H, Isomoto H, Yamaguchi N et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) for diffuse esophageal spasm. Endoscopy 2014; 46: E79–E81

[65] Sharata AM, Dunst CM, Pescarus R et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) for esophageal primary motility disorders: Analysis of 100 consecutive patients. J Gastrointest Surg 2015; 19: 161–170

[66] Tanaka S, Toyonaga T, Kawara F et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy using FlushKnife BT: a single-center series. Endosc Int Open 2017; 05: E663–E669

[67] Otani K, Tanaka S, Kawara F et al. Distal esophageal spasm with multiple esophageal diverticula successfully treated by peroral endoscopic myotomy. Clin J Gastroenterol 2017; 10: 442–446

[68] Tang X, Ren Y, Huang S et al. Gastrointestinal: Peroral endoscopic myotomy for distal esophageal spasm. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017; 32: 1536

[69] Ponds FA, Smout AJPM, Fockens P et al. Challenges of peroral endoscopic myotomy in the treatment of distal esophageal spasm. Scand J Gastroenterol 2018; 053: 252–255

[70] Mion F, Marjoux S, Subtil F et al. Botulinum toxin for the treatment of hypercontractile esophagus: Results of a double‐blind randomized sham‐controlled study. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2019; 31: e13587

[71] Vanuytsel T, Bisschops R, Farré R et al. Botulinum toxin reduces dysphagia in patients with nonachalasia primary esophageal motility disorders. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013; 11: 1115–1121.e2

[72] Vaezi MF, Pandolfino JE, Vela MF. ACG clinical guideline: diagnosis and management of achalasia. Am J Gastroenterol 2013; 108: 1238–1249; quiz 1250

[73] Martínek J, Spicàk J. A modified method of botulinum toxin injection in patients with achalasia: a pilot trial. Endoscopy 2003; 35: 841–844

[74] Pasricha P, Rai R, Ravich W et al. Botulinum toxin for achalasia: Long-term outcome and predictors of response. Gastroenterology 1996; 110: 1410–1415

[75] Annese V, Basciani M, Perri F et al. Controlled trial of botulinum toxin injection versus placebo and pneumatic dilation in achalasia. Gastroenterology 1996; 111: 1418–1424

[76] Vaezi MF, Richter JE, Wilcox CM et al. Botulinum toxin versus pneumatic dilatation in the treatment of achalasia: a randomised trial. Gut 1999; 44: 231–239

[77] Annese V, Bassotti G, Coccia G et al. A multicentre randomised study of intrasphincteric botulinum toxin in patients with oesophageal achalasia. GISMAD Achalasia Study Group. Gut 2000; 46: 597–600

[78] Neubrand M, Scheurlen C, Schepke M et al. Long-term results and prognostic factors in the treatment of achalasia with botulinum toxin. Endoscopy 2002; 34: 519–523

[79] D'Onofrio V, Miletto P, Leandro G et al. Long-term follow-up of achalasia patients treated with botulinum toxin. Dig Liver Dis 2002; 34: 105–110

[80] Zaninotto G, Annese V, Costantini M et al. Randomized controlled trial of botulinum toxin versus laparoscopic heller myotomy for esophageal achalasia. Ann Surg 2004; 239: 364–370

[81] Patti MG, Feo CV, Arcerito M et al. Effects of previous treatment on results of laparoscopic Heller myotomy for achalasia. Dig Dis Sci 1999; 44: 2270–2276

[82] Horgan S, Hudda K, Eubanks T et al. Does botulinum toxin injection make esophagomyotomy a more difficult operation? Surg Endosc 1999; 13: 576–579

[83] Smith CD, Stival A, Howell DL et al. Endoscopic therapy for achalasia before Heller myotomy results in worse outcomes than heller myotomy alone. Ann Surg 2006; 243: 579–584; discussion 584-586

[84] Gorodner MV, Galvani C, Fisichella PM et al. Preoperative lower esophageal sphincter pressure has little influence on the outcome of laparoscopic Heller myotomy for achalasia. Surg Endosc 2004; 18: 774–778

[85] Schlottmann F, Andolfi C, Kavitt RT et al. Multidisciplinary approach to esophageal achalasia: a single center experience. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A 2017; 27: 358–362

[86] Liu Z-Q, Li Q-L, Chen W-F et al. The effect of prior treatment on clinical outcomes in patients with achalasia undergoing peroral endoscopic myotomy. Endoscopy 2019; 51: 307–316

[87] Jones EL, Meara MP, Pittman MR et al. Prior treatment does not influence the performance or early outcome of per-oral endoscopic myotomy for achalasia. Surg Endosc 2016; 30: 1282–1286

[88] Zhao X, Pasricha PJ. Botulinum toxin for spastic GI disorders: a systematic review. Gastrointest Endosc 2003; 57: 219–235

[89] Andolfi C, Fisichella PM. Meta-analysis of clinical outcome after treatment for achalasia based on manometric subtypes. Br J Surg 2019; 106: 332–341

[90] Pandolfino JE, Kwiatek MA, Nealis T et al. Achalasia: a new clinically relevant classification by high-resolution manometry. Gastroenterology 2008; 135: 1526–1533

[91] Lee H, Chung H, Lee TH et al. Therapeutic outcome of achalasia based on high-resolution manometry: A Korean multicenter study. Am J Ther 2019; 26: e452–e461

---

Weusten Bas L.A.M. et al. Endoscopic management of GI motility disorders, part 1 … Endoscopy 2020; 52: 498–515 513

# Guideline

## References

[92] Min M, Peng LH, Yang YS et al. Characteristics of achalasia subtypes in untreated Chinese patients: a high-resolution manometry study. J Dig Dis 2012; 13: 504–509

[93] Marjoux S, Brochard C, Roman S et al. Botulinum toxin injection for hypercontractile or spastic esophageal motility disorders: may high-resolution manometry help to select cases? Dis Esophagus 2015; 28: 735–741

[94] Miller LS, Parkman HP, Schiano TD et al. Treatment of symptomatic nonachalasia esophageal motor disorders with botulinum toxin injection at the lower esophageal sphincter. Dig Dis Sci 1996; 41: 2025–2031

[95] Miller LS, Pullela SV, Parkman HP et al. Treatment of chest pain in patients with noncardiac, nonreflux, nonachalasia spastic esophageal motor disorders using botulinum toxin injection into the gastroesophageal junction. Am J Gastroenterol 2002; 97: 1640–1646

[96] Storr M, Allescher HD, Rösch T et al. Treatment of symptomatic diffuse esophageal spasm by endoscopic injections of botulinum toxin: a prospective study with long-term follow-up. Gastrointest Endosc 2001; 54: 754–759

[97] Alderliesten J, Conchillo JM, Leeuwenburgh I et al. Predictors for outcome of failure of balloon dilatation in patients with achalasia. Gut 2011; 60: 10–16

[98] Shah SWH, Butt AK, Malik K et al. Pneumatic balloon dilatation for achalasia cardia; early & late results, a single center study. Park J Med Sci 2017; 33: 1053–1058

[99] Boeckxstaens GE, Annese V, Bruley des Varannes S et al. Pneumatic dilation versus laparoscopic Heller's myotomy for idiopathic achalasia. NEJM 2011; 364: 1807–1816

[100] Chan KC, Wong SKH, Mui WLM et al. Short-term and long-term results of endoscopic balloon dilation for achalasia: 12 years' experience. Endoscopy 2004; 36: 690–694

[101] Elliott TR, Wu PI, Fuentealba S et al. Long-term outcome following pneumatic dilatation as initial therapy for idiopathic achalasia: an 18-year single-centre experience. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2013; 37: 1210–1219

[102] Farhoomand K, Connor JT, Richter JE et al. Predictors of outcome of pneumatic dilation in achalasia. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2004; 3565: 389–394

[103] Ghoshal UC, Karyampudi A, Verma A et al. Perforation following pneumatic dilation of achalasia cardia in a university hospital in northern India: A two-decade experience. Indian J Gastroenterol 2018; 37: 347–352

[104] Hulselmans M, Vanuytsel TIM, Degreef T et al. Long-term outcome of pneumatic dilation in the treatment of achalasia. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010; 8: 30–35

[105] Khan AA, Shah SWH, Alam A et al. Pneumatic balloon dilation in achalasia: a prospective comparison of balloon distention time. Am J Gastroenterol 1998; 93: 1064–1067

[106] Mikaeli J, Bishehsari F, Montazeri G et al. Pneumatic balloon dilatation in achalasia: a prospective comparison of safety and efficacy with different balloon diameters. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004; 20: 431–436

[107] Katsinelos P, Kountouras J, Paroutoglou G et al. Long-term results of pneumatic dilation for achalasia: A 15 years' experience. World J Gastroenterol 2005; 11: 5701–5705

[108] Hoeij FBVan, Prins LI, Smout AJPM et al. Efficacy and safety of pneumatic dilation in achalasia: A systematic review and meta‐analysis. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2019; 31: e13548

[109] Chuah S, Hu T, Wu K et al. Endoscope-guided pneumatic dilatation of esophageal achalasia without fluoroscopy is another safe and effective treatment option: a report of Taiwan. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech 2008; 18: 8–12

[110] Rai RR, Shende A, Joshi A et al. Rigiflex pneumatic dilation of achalasia without fluoroscopy: a novel office procedure. Gastrointest Endosc 2005; 62: 427–431

[111] Dobrucali A, Erzin Y, Tuncer M et al. Long-term results of graded pneumatic dilatation under endoscopic guidance in patients with primary esophageal achalasia. World J Gastroenterol 2004; 10: 3322–3327

[112] Tanaka Y, Iwakiri K, Kawami N et al. Predictors of a better outcome of pneumatic dilatation in patients with primary achalasia. J Gastroenterol 2010; 45: 153–158

[113] Smeets FGM, Masclee AAM, Keszthelyi D et al. Esophagogastric junction distensibility in the management of achalasia patients: relation to treatment outcome. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2015; 27: 1495–1503

[114] Maris T, Kapetanos D, Ilias A et al. Mid term results of pneumatic balloon dilatation in patients with achalasia. An Gastroenterol 2010; 23: 61–63

[115] Richter JE. Update on the management of achalasia: balloons, surgery and drugs. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008; 2: 435–445

[116] Richter JE, Boeckxstaens GE. Management of achalasia: surgery or pneumatic dilation. Gut 2011; 60: 869–876

[117] Boeckxstaens G. The European experience of achalasia treatment. Gastroenterol Hepatol (NY) 2011; 7: 609–611

[118] Moonen A, Annese V, Belmans A et al. Long-term results of the European achalasia trial: a multicentre randomised controlled trial comparing pneumatic dilation versus laparoscopic Heller myotomy. Gut 2016; 65: 732–739

[119] Vela MF, Richter JE, Khandwala F et al. The long-term efficacy of pneumatic dilatation and Heller myotomy for the treatment of achalasia. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2006; 4: 580–587

[120] Sanaka MR, Raja S, Thota PN. Esophageal perforation after pneumatic dilation for achalasia: successful closure with an over-the-scope clip. J Clin Gastroenterol 2016; 50: 267–268

[121] Campos GM, Vittinghoff E, Rabl C et al. Endoscopic and surgical treatments for achalasia: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Surg 2009; 249: 45–57

[122] Rebecchi F, Giaccone C, Farinella E et al. Randomized controlled trial of laparoscopic heller myotomy plus dor fundoplication versus nissen fundoplication for achalasia long-term results. Ann Surg 2008; 248: 1023–1029

[123] Repici A, Fuccio L, Maselli R et al. GERD after per-oral endoscopic myotomy as compared with Heller's myotomy with fundoplication: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Gastrointest Endosc 2018; 87: 934–943

[124] Schlottmann F, Luckett DJ, Fine J et al. Laparoscopic Heller myotomy versus peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) for achalasia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Surg 2018; 267: 451–460

[125] Inoue H, Sato H, Ikeda H et al. Per-oral endoscopic myotomy: a series of 500 patients. J Am Coll Surg 2015; 221: 256–264

[126] Barbieri LA, Hassan C, Rosati R et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis: Efficacy and safety of POEM for achalasia. United Eur Gastroenterol J 2015; 3: 325–334

[127] Kumbhari V, Tieu AH, Onimaru M et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) vs laparoscopic Heller myotomy (LHM) for the treatment of Type III achalasia in 75 patients: a multicenter comparative study. Endosc Int Open 2015; 03: 195–201

[128] Familiari P, Greco S, Gigante G et al. Gastroesophageal reflux disease after peroral endoscopic myotomy: Analysis of clinical, procedural and functional factors, associated with gastroesophageal reflux disease and esophagitis. Dig Endosc 2016; 28: 33–41

[129] Jacques J, Pagnon L, Hure F et al. Peroral endoscopic pyloromyotomy is efficacious and safe for refractory gastroparesis: prospective trial with assessment of pyloric function. Endoscopy 2019; 51: 40–49

---

514 Weusten Bas L.A.M. et al. Endoscopic management of GI motility disorders, part 1 … Endoscopy 2020; 52: 498–515

[130] Gourcerol G, Tissier F, Melchior C et al. Impaired fasting pyloric compliance in gastroparesis and the therapeutic response to pyloric dilatation. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015; 41: 360–367

[131] Malik Z, Sankineni A, Parkman HP. Assessing pyloric sphincter pathophysiology using EndoFLIP in patients with gastroparesis. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2015; 27: 524–531

[132] Desprez C, Melchior C, Wuestenberghs F et al. Pyloric distensibility measurement predicts symptomatic response to intrapyloric botulinum toxin injection. Gastrointest Endosc 2019; 90: 754–760

[133] Mearin F, Camilleri M, Malagelada JR. Pyloric dysfunction in diabetics with recurrent nausea and vomiting. Gastroenterology 1986; 90: 1919–1925

[134] Camilleri M, Hasler WL, Parkman HP et al. Measurement of gastrointestinal motility in the GI laboratory. Gastroenterology 1998; 115: 747–762

[135] Waseem S, Moshiree B, Draganov PV. Gastroparesis: Current diagnostic challenges and management considerations. World J Gastroenterol 2009; 15: 25–37

[136] Coleski R, Anderson MA, Hasler WL. Factors associated with symptom response to pyloric injection of botulinum toxin in a large series of gastroparesis patients. Dig Dis Sci 2009; 54: 2634–2642

[137] Friedenberg FK, Palit A, Parkman HP et al. Botulinum toxin A for the treatment of delayed gastric emptying. Am J Gastroenterol 2008; 103: 416–423

[138] Arts J, Holvoet L, Caenepeel P et al. Clinical trial: A randomized-controlled crossover study of intrapyloric injection of botulinum toxin in gastroparesis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2007; 26: 1251–1258

[139] Malik Z, Kataria R, Modayil R et al. Gastric per oral endoscopic myotomy (G-POEM) for the treatment of refractory gastroparesis: early experience. Dig Dis Sci 2018; 63: 2405–2412

[140] Rodriguez JH, Haskins IN, Strong AT et al. Per oral endoscopic pyloromyotomy for refractory gastroparesis: initial results from a single institution. Surg Endosc 2017; 31: 5381–5388

[141] Strong AT, Landreneau JP, Cline M et al. Per-oral pyloromyotomy (POP) for medically refractory post-surgical gastroparesis. J Gastrointest Surg 2019; 23: 1095–1103

[142] Kim JH, Lee HS, Kim MS et al. Balloon dilatation of the pylorus for delayed gastric emptying after esophagectomy. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2008; 33: 1105–1111

[143] Lanuti M, Dedelva P, Morse CR et al. Management of delayed gastric emptying after esophagectomy with endoscopic balloon dilatation of the pylorus. Ann Thorac Surg 2011; 91: 1019–1024

[144] Ericson J, Sunde B, Lindblad M et al. Large-diameter (30-35 mm) pneumatic balloon dilatation of the pylorus in patients with gastric outlet obstruction symptoms after esophagectomy. Scand J Surg 2013; 102: 83–86

[145] Bae JS, Kim SH, Shin CI et al. Efficacy of gastric balloon dilatation and/or retrievable stent insertion for pyloric spasms after pylorus-preserving gastrectomy: Retrospective analysis. PLoS One 2015; 10: 1–16

[146] Maus MKH, Leers J, Herbold T et al. Gastric outlet obstruction after esophagectomy: retrospective analysis of the effectiveness and safety of postoperative endoscopic pyloric dilatation. World J Surg 2016; 40: 2405–2411

[147] Wellington J, Scott B, Kundu S et al. Effect of endoscopic pyloric therapies for patients with nausea and vomiting and functional obstructive gastroparesis. Auton Neurosci Basic Clin 2017; 202: 56–61

[148] Khashab MA, Besharati S, Ngamruengphong S et al. Refractory gastroparesis can be successfully managed with endoscopic transpyloric stent placement and fixation (with video). Gastrointest Endosc 2015; 82: 1106–1109

[149] Clarke JO, Sharaiha RZ, Kord Valeshabad A et al. Through-the-scope transpyloric stent placement improves symptoms and gastric emptying in patients with gastroparesis. Endoscopy 2013; 45: E189–E190

[150] Khoury T, Mizrahi M, Mahamid M et al. State of the art review with literature summary on gastric peroral endoscopic pyloromyotomy for gastroparesis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018; 33: 1829–1833

[151] Mekaroonkamol P, Patel V, Shah R et al. Association between duration or etiology of gastroparesis and clinical response after gastric per-oral endoscopic pyloromyotomy. Gastrointest Endosc 2019; 89: 969–976

[152] Gonzalez JM, Benezech A, Vitton V et al. G-POEM with antro-pyloromyotomy for the treatment of refractory gastroparesis: mid-term follow-up and factors predicting outcome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2017; 46: 364–370

[153] Rodriguez J, Strong AT, Haskins IN et al. Per-oral pyloromyotomy (POP) for medically refractory gastroparesis: short term results from the first 100 patients at a high volume center. Ann Surg 2018; 268: 421–430

[154] Landreneau JP, Strong AT, El-Hayek K et al. Laparoscopic pyloroplasty versus endoscopic per-oral pyloromyotomy for the treatment of gastroparesis. Surg Endosc 2019; 33: 773–781

[155] Kahaleh M, Gonzalez J-M, Baptista A et al. Gastric peroral endoscopic myotomy for the treatment of refractory gastroparesis: a multicentered international experience. Endoscopy 2018; 50: 1053–1058

[156] Martinek J. Endoscopic clips versus overstich suturing system device for closure of mucosotomy after G-POEM. 2018. Available from: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03679104 Accessed: 9 April 2020

[157] Jung Y, Lee J, Gromski MA et al. Assessment of the length of myotomy in peroral endoscopic pyloromyotomy (G-POEM) using a submucosal tunnel technique (video). Surg Endosc 2015; 29: 2377–2384

[158] Yusuf T, Brugge W. Endoscopic therapy of benign pyloric stenosis and gastric outlet obstruction. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2006; 22: 570–573

[159] Revicki DA, Rentz AM, Dubois D et al. Gastroparesis cardinal symptom index (GCSI): development and validation of a patient reported assessment of severity of gastroparesis. Qual Life Res 2004; 13: 833–844

[160] Rentz AM, Kahrilas P, Stanghellini V et al. Development and psychometric evaluation of the patient assessment of upper gastrointestinal symptom severity index (PAGI-SYM) in patients with upper gastrointestinal disorders. Qual Life Res 2004; 13: 1737–1749

---

Weusten Bas L.A.M. et al. Endoscopic management of GI motility disorders, part 1 … Endoscopy 2020; 52: 498–515 515

## Appendix 1s

| Task force | Members (task force leaders indicated by asterisk) |
|---|---|
| Zenker's diverticulum | SI\*, MB, JMG, VLZ, JM, HN, FP, DR, BW |
| Achalasia | AB\*, RS\*, MB, JMG, HL, JM, DP, FP, ES, DR, PF, BW |
| GERD | RT\*, MB, AB, SI, VLZ, HL, HN, FP, ES, RS, DR, PF, BW |
| Gastroparesis | JM\*, MB, JMG, VLZ, HL, HN, DP, FP, JT, BW |
| Intractable constipation | HN\*, SI, JM, JT, RT, BW |
| Ogilvie's syndrome | BW\*, SM, JT, RT |

# Appendix 2s part a

---

## *Achalasia*

---

## Clinical questions\*

- **General:** *these will be answered by the UEG-ESNM guideline on achalasia*
  - *How to diagnose achalasia*
  - *What are the treatment options for achalasia*
    - *Heller Myotomy, PD, botox, POEM,*
    - *Stents (we might mention that there is no role for stents in achalasia)*
- **Technical**
  - How should endoscopic botulin toxin injection in the LES be performed
  - How should endoscopic pneumodilation be performed
  - How should endoscopic myotomy be performed

## Research questions

- *What is the comparative therapeutic efficacy and safety of endoscopic botulin toxin injection in the treatment of achalasia?*
- *What is the comparative therapeutic efficacy and safety of endoscopic dilatation?*
- *What is the comparative therapeutic efficacy and safety of per-oral endoscopic myotomy?*
- *What is the comparative therapeutic efficacy and safety of surgical myotomy?*
- *How to choose a (initial and recurrent) therapeutic option for the achalasia patient? (expert opinion)*
- For all types of treatment: what should be the pre-procedural care
- Botulin toxin (Botox) as a therapeutic option
  - What is the optimal dose of botox?
  - Technique for and location of injection
    - Is there a role for botox injection in distal esophagus in addition to injection into the LES in Type-3 achalasia
  - *Does previous Botox injection influences other therapies (expert opinion)*
  - Is there a role for Botox in the treatment of Jackhammer / other motility disorders
- Pneumodilation as a therapeutic option
  - what is the optimal scheme / regimen (a single dilation or multiple successive dilatations, and if so how many and what interval)
  - what type of balloon should be used (pneumatic versus water filled)
  - what balloon diameter should be used
  - to what pressure should the balloon be inflated
  - what is the optimal duration of inflation of the pneumodilation balloon
  - is there a role for Esoflip in the treatment of achalasia

---

\* Clinical and research questions in *italic* were covered by the UEG/ESNM guideline on Achalasia [1]

# Appendix 2s part a

- what should be recommended as post-op care after balloon dilation (eg barium swallow, diet, PPI prescription
- how to manage complications of PD
- What is the optimal technique for POEM in terms of
  - Knives
  - Settings
  - Length of tunnel
  - Length of myotomy
  - Minimum extension of myotomy into the cardia
  - Full or circular muscle myotomy, or partially full
  - Location if the myotomy (posterior, right-lateral/lesser curvature)
  - Use of CO₂
  - Settings on electrosurgical unit
  - Lavage of tunnel with antibiotics
  - Use of overtube
  - How to close the mucosal entry
  - Should antibiotics be administered around the procedure
  - How to treat complications such as
    - Pneumoperitoneum
    - Post-op leakage
  - Post-op care (x-ray? Re-endoscopy?, duration of admission, restart of oral intake)
  - rePOEM after failed therapy (location, indication)
- Optimal follow-up after endoscopic therapy (will this be covered by the UEG guideline?)
- Significance of reflux after endoscopic therapies (will be covered by UEG guideline)
- Role of endoscopy in the treatment of other spastic esophageal motor disorders

---

<sup>1</sup> Oude Nijhuis RAB, Zaninotto G, Roman S, Boeckxstaens GE, Fockens P, Langendam MW, Plumb AA, Smout AJPM, Targarona EM, Trukhmanov AS, Weusten BLAM, Bredenoord AJ. European Guideline on Achalasia – UEG and ESNM recommendations.

# Appendix 2s part b

---

## *Gastroparesis*

---

## Clinical questions

- **General**
  - What are the indications and contraindications for pylorus-directed endoscopic therapy and how should patients be selected
  - What is the efficacy of pylorus-directed therapy in gastroparesis
    - Botox, balloon dilation, G-POEM, stenting
  - Are there subsets of patients that might respond more favorable to pylorus-directed therapy than others (idiopathic versus diabetic versus post-surgical versus other etiologies of gastroparesis)
- **Technical**
  - How to perform endoscopic botulin toxin injection in the treatment of gastroparesis
  - How to perform endoscopic balloon dilatation in the treatment of gastroparesis
  - How to perform per-oral endoscopic myotomy in the treatment of gastroparesis
  - how to perform stenting

## Research questions

- What is the therapeutic efficacy and safety of endoscopic botulin toxin injection in the treatment of gastroparesis?
- What is the therapeutic efficacy and safety of endoscopic balloon dilatation in the treatment of gastroparesis?
- What is the therapeutic efficacy and safety of per-oral endoscopic myotomy in the treatment of gastroparesis?
- What is the therapeutic efficacy and safety of transpyloric stenting in the treatment of gastroparesis??
- How to select patients that could benefit from pylorus-directed therapy (GCIS score, Endoflip, gastric emptying test, food retention after sufficient fasting, spastic pylorus on endoscopy, response on botox before proceeding to G-POEM, only for refractory or also partial responsive to prokinetics, …)
- For all types of treatment: what should be the pre-procedural care (intake, sedation, general anesthesia, etc)
- In Botox:
  - What is the optimal dose of botox?
  - What is the optimal technique
- In balloon dilation, what is the optimal
  - Type of balloon (pneumo or water filled)
  - balloon diameter
  - balloon pressure
  - duration of inflation

# Appendix 2s part b

- what should be recommended as post-op care after balloon dilation (eg barium swallow, diet, PPI prescription)
- how to treat complications (perforation, bleeding)
- dilation protocol
- use of x-ray yes/no, or solely under endoscopic control
- guided by Endoflip results directly post-treatment
- other indicators of success such as blood on balloon, number of visible tears, etc.

- What is the optimal technique for G-POEM in terms of
  - Knifes
  - Settings
  - Type of endoscope,
  - Devices for coagulation
  - Location of tunnel entry
  - Shape of tunnel entry (longitudinal, transverse, oblique)
  - Length of tunnel
  - Length of myotomy
  - Antegrade or retrograde myotomy
  - Extension into the antrum
  - Location if the myotomy (posterior, right-lateral/lesser curvature)
  - Use of CO2
  - Lavage of tunnel with antibiotics
  - Use of overtube
  - How to close the mucosal entry
  - Should (iv) antibiotics be administered around the procedure
  - How to treat complications such as
    - Pneumoperitoneum
    - Post-op leakage
    - bleeding
  - Post-op care (x-ray? Re-endoscopy?, duration of admission, restart of oral intake,)
  - Re-G-POEM after failed therapy (location, indication)

- For transpyloric stenting:
  - What type of stents should be used
  - What length of stent should be used
  - Dwell time (when to remove the stent)
  - What is the value of fixation of the stent (eg with endoscopic suturing)

- For all treatment modalities: What should a protocol for follow up after pylorus directed therapy look like.

# Appendix 3s part a

## Achalasia – data extraction

### POEM: Gastric extension of myotomy

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Ramirez (2018) | Prospective POEM cohort compared to retrospective Heller Cohort | None | 35 POEM, 35 Heller | 50 (average for POEM), 45 (average for Heller) | Manometric diagnosis of achalasia | POEM was performed using selective myotomy of circular muscle layer. Extension of the myotomy on the distal side was defined on two morphological findings, spontaneous opening of EGJ with no insufflation, and a visual sign in retroflexion comparable to a type II Hill valve. Measuring of myotomy length was performed with the endoscope marks and the edge of the overtube with no pressure on it. Hill valve was used as landmark for length measurement. Gastric extension never exceeded 2mm. | Heller: LHM combined with Dor fundoplication was performed. Full-thickness myotomy was performed to at least 5 cm proximal and 3–4 cm distal to the EGJ, which was recognized by anatomical findings such as the periesophageal fat, changes of the muscle fibers, and the His angle. | 10mo POEM, 20mo Heller | Clinical success measured by Eckardt score (≤3 at the time of their last follow-up) - Symptomatic recurrence and further treatment - Intraoperative and postoperative complications - Presence of symptomatic reflux measured by GERDHRQL score - Heartburn score: six questions from HRQL score. Worst heartburn symptoms =30. No heartburn symptoms = 0. Scores of ≤12 indicate heartburn elimination - Signs of esophagitis (measured by routine esophagogastroduodenoscopy at 6 months) - Need for PPI | **POEM vs Heller** Eckardt score pre/postop: 9/1.2 vs 9.2/1.3; Heartburn score: 1.3 vs 2.1; Reflux Sx: 20% vs 17.1%; PPI: 22.8% vs 20%; Esophagitis: 4.7% vs 4.5%; Major post-op complications: 2.8% vs 2.8%; Further treatment: 28.5% vs 22.8% | POEM with gastric extension <2cm was compared to Heller with gastric extension >3cm and showed similar outcomes |
| Teitelbaum (2016) | Prospective cohort | None | 16 | >18 | >18 years and a diagnosis of achalasia, types I and II only, confirmed by esophageal manometry | POEM with selective myotomy of the inner, circular muscle layer in four incremental segments, advancing from proximal to distal: 1) an esophageal myotomy (from 6 cm proximal to the EGJ, to 1 cm proximal to it), 2) a myotomy ablating the LES complex (from 1 cm proximal to the EGJ, to 1 cm distal to it), 3) an initial gastric extension (from 1 cm distal to the EGJ, to 2 cm distal), and 4) a final gastric extension (from 2 cm distal to the EGJ, to 3 cm distal). The endoscope shaft markings were used to measure myotomy distances in relation to the EGJ, using the intraluminal location of the squamocolumnar junction (SCJ) to mark the EGJ. FLIP measurements were taken to measure the EGJ distension index after each step of POEM, including each of the incremental myotomy extensions, using a bag distension volume of 40 ml. Between measurements the bag was deflated and the probe was advanced into the stomach. | None | | Esophagogastric junction distensibility index defined as the minimum cross-sectional area (i.e. narrowest portion of the EGJ) divided by intra-bag pressure. | EGJ-DI: from 0cm to 1cm gastric myotomy: (mean pre 3.8 ± 1.8 vs. post 6.2 ± 2.4 mm²/mmHg, p < .001); From 1cm to 2cm gastric myotomy: (mean pre 6.2 ± 2.4 vs. post 7.0 ± 2.4 mm²/mmHg, p < .001); From 2cm to 3cm gastric myotomy: (mean pre 7.0 ± 2.4 vs. post 7.2 ± 2.7 mm²/mmHg, p = .46) | The major finding of this study was that two main steps of the POEM procedure, creation of the submucosal tunnel and the myotomy segment immediately across the EGJ, accounted for the majority of the increase in distensibility attributable to the operation. Extension of the myotomy 2 cm onto the stomach wall resulted in a small but significant augmentation of this effect, but further lengthening of the myotomy to 3 cm past the EGJ did not increase distensibility further. |
| Grimes (2016) | Prospective RCT | First 40 patients Randomized by the operating room scheduler, who was blinded to the purpose of the study. Next 60 patients randomized using random number generator. Endoscopists were aware of which patients had been assigned to the single-scope group and which to the double-scope group | 50 double scope, 50 single scope | 46 ± 15 (double scope) vs. 49 ± 16 years (single scope) | Patients scheduled to undergo per oral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) for achalasia | Same as single scope POEM. However, immediately following completion of the myotomy, a 5.4-/5.8-mm diameter neonatal gastroscope (GIF-XP290N, Olympus, Japan) was introduced into the stomach to obtain a retroflex view of the gastric cardia, while the dissecting scope was placed at the end of the submucosal tunnel and used to transilluminate. The endoscopist was then permitted to extend the myotomy at his or her discretion prior to closing the mucosal incision. | POEM was performed with a single scope: A long submucosal tunnel was created and carried onto the gastric cardia. Selective division of the circular muscle bundles was performed. Gastric myotomy length was measured using distance markings on the endoscope itself. | 2mo post-procedure | Rate of myotomy extension after introduction of the second endoscope; Total length of the gastric myotomy; Overall complication rate; Change in Eckardt score; Clinical success rate (Eckardt ≤3); Development of post-procedure reflux symptoms or esophagitis (subjective sx or Los Angeles class C or D esophagitis on upper endoscopy) | **Double scope vs single scope:** Final gastric myotomy length: 3.2 vs 2.6 cm (p=0.013); Intra-op complications: 12% vs 6% (p>0.9); post-op complications: 8% vs 10% (p>0.9); Clinical success: 93% vs 97% (p=0.59); Post-op reflux: 14% vs 18% (p=0.74); post-op esophagitis: 61% vs 75% (p=0.24) | Double scope can extend gastric myotomy length, however no significant difference in outcomes was observed for 3.2cm average gastric myotomy length vs 2.6cm |


| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Kumbhari (2016) | Single center cohort | None | 24 | Mean: 47.8 +/- 17.4 | All consecutive patients who underwent POEM at a single center between January and August 2014 | POEM, submucosal fibers were dissected, and a submucosal tunnel was extended until the endoscopist was of the opinion that the tunnel extended 3 cm into the proximal stomach. A radio-opaque object was used to mark the GEJ in 2 ways: 1) An endoscopic clip was deployed immediately distal to the EGJ on the opposite side to where the submucosal tunnel had been created. 2) The endoscope was removed from the submucosal tunnel and placed at the EGJ, Fluoroscopy was performed, and a 19-gauge transdermal needle attached to adhesive tape was placed on the skin in line with the tip of the endoscope and leveled with the EGJ. Intraprocedural fluoroscopy was then used to document the length of the submucosal tunnel below the EGJ. Subsequently, either selective myotomy of the inner circular muscle bundles or full-thickness myotomy was performed until the terminal end of the submucosal tunnel. Mucosal entry was closed using endoscopic clips or endoscopic suturing. | None | None | % of cases where measurement of submucosal tunnel below EGJ could be done. Extension of submucosal tunnel | % of cases where measurement of myotomy below EGJ could be done: 100%; % of patients requiring myotomy extension: 20.8%; mean extension of myotomy: 1.4 +/- .5 cm | Objective way of measuring gastric extension |
| Tanaka (2018) | Prospective cohort | None | 39 | 16-84 (median: 54) | Patients who underwent POEM for the treatment of achalasia and spastic esophageal motility disorders such as jackhammer esophagus and distal esophageal spasm from March to August 2016. Patients who underwent POEM in the 5 o'clock position were enrolled in the study and those with other positions were excluded | POEM tunnel was made in the 5 o'clock position, with the 7 o'clock position used only for patients with a history of prior Heller myotomy to avoid fibrosis from previous surgery. A selective circular myotomy was carried out with care to. The anal end of the submucosal tunnel and myotomy were extended to the second penetrating vessel in patients when two penetrating vessels were exposed. In all cases, the anal end was confirmed by the double-scope POEM technique after completion of the submucosal tunnel, and length from the anal end to the GEJ was measured by the scale of the inserted endoscope after completion of myotomy. | None | 3 months | Eckardt scores; integrated relaxation pressure (IRP); Detection of 2 penetrating vessels; Complications; GERD sx after POEM | % of patients where 2 penetrating vessels were detected: 91.2%; Complication % in patients with 2 penetrating vessels: 11.7%; Length of gastric myotomy in patients with 2 penetrating vessels: 3cm (2-4cm range); Eckardt score (median) before POEM vs after: 6 vs 0 (p<0.001); GERD sx after POEM in patients with 2PV: 8.8%; IRP (median) before POEM vs after: 26.3 mmHg vs 9.3 (p<0.001) | 2 penetrating vessels technique can be used to determine gastric extension in patients. |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# Appendix 3s part a (continued)

## Achalasia – data extraction

### POEM: circular versus full myotomy

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Li et al. 2013 | Retrospective cohort analysis on a prospective database | None | 234: 103 full-thickness, 131 circular muscle | Full thickness vs circular: (37.6 +/- 13.2 vs 41.5 +/- 16.3 years p = 0.04) | Patients who had primary achalasia and were treated with POEM successfully by a single operator at the authors' institution between August 2010 and March 2012. Eckardt symptom score >=4. Exclusion criteria: severe cardiopulmonary disease or other serious disease leading to unacceptable surgical risk, pseudoachalasia, megaesophagus (diameter > 7 cm), and hiatal hernia (>2 cm) | POEM with endoscopic full-thickness myotomy, including the internal circular and longitudinal muscular layer. | POEM with endoscopic circular muscle myotomy alone, involving only the internal circular muscular layer. Patients who had only limited damage of the longitudinal muscle fibers were also assigned to this group. | 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after POEM and annually thereafter. Patients were contacted via telephone every 3 months postoperatively to assess for complications and to obtain a current Eckardt score. Average follow-up Full-thickness vs circular: (6.1 +/- 4.3 months vs 10.5 +/- 3.8 months, p = 0.00) | Therapeutic success (reduction in the Eckardt score to <=3); procedure time, hospital stay, myotomy length; adverse events (pneumomediastinum was NOT considered adverse event); Lower esophageal sphincter pressure on manometry pre- and post POEM; Clinical reflux complications at the follow-up assessment (defined as reflux symptoms GERD-Q score>=7 or esophagitis on EGD) | **Full-Thickness vs Circular:** Therapeutic success: 96% vs 95% (p=0.75); Average gain in weight post-treatment: 5.7kg vs 6.7 (p=0.18); Clinical reflux complications: 21.2% vs 16.5% (p=0.38); LES pressure pre/post-treatment D-value: 18.1mmHg vs 17.4 (p=0.75); intra-op complications: only statistically significant for subcutaneous emphysema: 7.8% vs 21.1% (p=0.00); post-op complications: only statistically significant for subcutaneous emphysema: 26.2% vs 44.6% (p=0.01); Procedure time: 41.7min vs 48.9 (p=0.02) | Symptom relief and manometry outcomes were comparable between patients undergoing full-thickness and circular muscle myotomy. Full-thickness myotomy significantly reduced the procedure time but did not increase the procedure-related adverse events or clinical reflux complications. |
| Wang et al. 2016 | Single-center retrospective study | None | 56: 24 Full-Thickness, 32 circular. 110 underwent POEM but only 56 underwent GERD evaluation and were included | range: 14-71 years old | Patients with achalasia who underwent POEM between August 2011 and October 2012. Only patients who underwent a complete assessment of GERD, including symptom evaluation (including Eckardt score, GerdQ score), and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), high-resolution manometry (HRM) and esophageal pH monitoring were included in the study. | POEM with full-thickness myotomy at approximately 3 cm above or below the EGJ | POEM with circular myotomy alone | Mean follow-up of 39.3 mo | Treatment efficacy defined as Eckardt score ≤ 3; Clinically relevant GERD (defined as abnormal esophageal acid exposure associated with GERD symptoms and/or esophagitis); Abnormal esophageal acid exposure was defined by percentage total reflux time (%TRT; esophageal pH < 4) > 5%; GerdQ score > 7 was considered indicative of significant GERD symptoms; Reflux esophagitis was classified according to the Los Angeles Classification; Eckardt score and manometry results | **Full-Thickness vs Circular:** Treatment efficacy: 100% for both groups; GERD sx: 33.3% vs 15.6% (p=0.12); Positive pH test: 50% vs 40.6% (p=0.485); Esophagitis: 29.2% vs 15.6% (p=0.222); Clinically relevant GERD: 37.5% vs 12.5% (p=0.028) | Treatment efficacy and manometry outcomes were comparable between the circular and full-thickness myotomy groups. However, patients with full-thickness myotomy may have a higher rate of clinically relevant GERD. |
| Duan et al. 2017 | Retrospective cohort | None | 123: 70 full-thickness, 53 circular | range: 14-74 | Patients with severe achalasia: Inclusion criteria: (1) Diagnosis of achalasia on the basis of clinical symptoms, barium esophagogram, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), and high-resolution manometry (HRM). (2) Severe achalasia was considered when at least one of the following points are met: (a) Eckardt score preoperatively >=6; (b) diameter of esophagus >=6 cm; and (c) sigmoid-type esophagus. Exclusion criteria: active esophagitis or giant ulcer at EGJ and pseudoachalasia, a secondary achalasia, which is usually associated with malignancy rather than idiopathic neuromuscular dysfunction of esophageal motility. Patients with severe coagulopathy, cardiopulmonary disease, or other disease that lead to intolerability of EGD or operation. | POEM where both internal circular and longitudinal muscle layers were resected within a range of 6 cm from the EGJ. | POEM where selective circular muscular bundles were resected and the outer longitudinal muscle bundles remained. | Follow-up visit at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after POEM for EGD and symptom assessment. Then, every 6 months thereafter by telephone to obtain Eckardt score and annually for EGD to observe the status of esophageal closure and check for any signs of reflux esophagitis. Median follow-up: 30 months | The efficacy of treatment (Eckardt score of <=3, LES pressure decrease (usually >50% decrease), and improvement of esophageal emptying as assessed by barium esophagram); Treatment success (post-myotomy Eckardt score <=3); Treatment failure (Eckardt score > 4 within postoperative 6 months); Abnormal esophageal acid exposure (percentage total reflux time (esophageal pH <4) >5%); Perioperative adverse events and late adverse events occurred in follow-up (incidences that occurred intra- or postoperatively during hospital stay, like infection, bleeding, gas-related complication, and mucosal perforation.) | **Full-Thickness vs Circular:** Operating time: 57.4min vs 63.2 (p<0.05); Adverse events: 11.4% vs 11.3% (p>0.05); Treatment success: 98.6% vs 98.1% (p>0.05); Decrease in mean LES pressure: 11.58mmHg vs 12.08mmHg (p<0.05); Reflux esophagitis: 5.7% vs 3.8% (p=0.698); 24h pH monitoring was performed in 19/123 patients, abnormal esophageal acid exposure: 60% vs 40% (p>0.05) | Treatment efficacy and safety were similar in short-to-medium term. Full-thickness myotomy significantly reduces the operative duration, there is a tendency towards increased GERD (not statistically significant) |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# Appendix 3s part a (continued)

## Achalasia – data extraction

### POEM: technique

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Tan (2018) | Prospective, randomized, single center | Yes / No | 63 | 44.1 | Treatment naive achalasia patients (HRM, EGD, TBE), no sigmoid shape, age 18-70, ES ≥4, consented for POEM | Liquid diet for 3 days, nil per mouth for 24h | Anterior (1- to 2-o'clock position) vs posterior (5- to 6-o'clock) myotomy | mean 15.5 months | Primary: ttt success (ES ≤3); secondary: procedure-related AEs, LESP and IRP measured on HRM (at 3 months), clinical reflux. AEs - pathological reflux was defined as acid exposure time >5% on pH metry of PPI (at 3 months), GerdQ score >7 was considered indicative of significant reflux, EGD (at 3, 6, 12 months), Clinically relevant GERD was defined as altered AET associated with GERD symptoms and/or esophagitis on EGD | Reflux parameters: There was no significant difference between the 2 groups (P > .05). No significant difference between the 2 groups in terms of general characteristics, ttt success, pre- and postoperative esophageal manometry, ES and AE (P > .05). | |
| Ramchandani (2018) | Prospective, randomized, controlled, single center | Yes / Yes (Participant and Outcome Assessor) | 60 | AG mean 38 ± 13.35, PG 43.9 ± 15.7 | Primary achalasia, ES>3, no previous endoscopic or surgical myotomy | Clear liquid diet 24h, prophylactic ATB (Piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5g 30mins prior to POEM and continued for 3-7 days), POEM was performed according to the standard procedure - mucosal incision, submucosal tunneling, myotomy and closure using clips | Anterior (1 – 2 o'clock position) myotomy (AG) or posterior (5 o'clock position) (PG) | 1, 3 and 6 months | Primary: ES, operative details, perioperative AEs; Secondary: pre and postoperative changes in LES pressures on HRM (at 1 month), column height on TBE (at 1, 2 and 5 min), symptoms of GERD post POEM by GERD–FSSG questionnaire (>8 points suggested presence of GERD), 24h pH monitoring off PPI (at 3 months) and comparison of reflux rates and DeMeester score (>14.7 was considered GERD), endoscopic (at 3 months) findings of GERD. | Technical success in 100%, operative time was comparable (AG - 65 ± 17.65 minutes vs PG - 61.2 ± 16.67; P = 0.38); Mucosotomies were more frequent in AG (20% vs 3.3%; P = 0.02). No significant difference in other perioperative AEs. At 1-month follow-up Eckardt score AG 0.57 ± 0.56 vs PG 0.53 ± 0.71; (P = 0.81), mean LES pressure AG 11.93 ± 6.36 vs PG 11.77 ± 6.61; (P = 0.59) and esophageal emptying on timed barium swallow at 5 minutes AG 1.32 ± 1.08 cm vs PG 1.29 ± 0.79 cm; (P = 0.09) were comparable in both groups. At 3 months, Eckardt score (0.52 ± 0.59 vs 0.63 ± 0.62; P = 0.51) was similar in both groups. Incidence of esophagitis on EGD was comparable in both groups (24% vs 33.3%; P = 0.45), however, pH metry at 3 months showed significantly more esophageal acid exposure in PG (2.98% ± 4.24 vs 13.99% ± 14.48; P < 0.01). At 6 months clinical efficacy and LES pressures were comparable in both groups. | |
| Onimaru et al. (2015) | Prospective, non randomized | No / No | 21 | Adults | Achalasia patients receiving GC myotomy | 100% technical success, mean gastric myotomy length 2.6 cm SD 1.1 | No | short | Mean LES pressure (21.2 to 10 mmHg), ES 5 to 1, reflux 51% (11/21) | Mean LES pressure (21.2 to 10 mmHg), ES 5 to 1, reflux 51% (11/21), no severe AE occurred | |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

---

### POEM: lavage of tunnel

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Bayer (2017) | Retrospective | No | 124 | Mean 46.4 | Patients with achalasia undergoing POEM | Gentamicin lavage of the submucosal tunnel with 80mg of gentamicin diluted in 10ml of saline prior to myotomy | Retrospective analysis, POEM with gentamicin lavage (A) vs without (B) | 3 years | Infectious adverse events (mediastinitis, peritonitis, abscess), post-POEM fever, WBC count, creatinine, pain, hospital stay | Group A: lower post-POEM CRP median 52.7 mg/L vs 69.5 mg/L (p=0.01) and WBC median 10.9 x 10⁹ vs. 12.6 x 10⁹ p<0.01, clinically insignificant, no difference in pain, shorter hospitalization in group B - but due to protocol change | |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# Botox

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Eckard score - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Distal contractile integral / number of premature esophageal contractions - IRP (4 s) - barium column height at 5 mn **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD | |
| Annese (1996) | RCT | Yes / Yes | 16 | 55.3 | Achalasia | Botox 100 UI, LES | Saline | 12 m | Symptom score /9, LES pressure, Barium column height at 10 mn | significant improvement of all parameters at M1, M6, M12 | only 2/8 patients with "vigorous" achalasia |
| Vaezi (1999) | RCT | Yes / Yes | 34 | 57 | Achalasia | Botox 100 UI, LES | Rigiflex 30 mm dilatation | 12 m | Symptom score /15, clinical remission, LES pressure, barium column height, esophageal diameter | 32% vs 70 % clinical remission at 12 months (p<0,05) | 9/22 with type III/vigorous achalasia "trend towards a more favorable outcome in patients with vigorous achalasia, p= 0,16) |
| Annese (2000) | RCT | Yes / Yes | 118 | 55 | Achalasia | 100 UI, LES | 50 UI, 200 UI | 12 m | Symptom score /9, clinical remission, LES pressure, esophageal diameter | No difference between the groups at M1 - 18% recurrences at M12 in 100 U group vs 46% and 42% in the 50 UI and 200 UI groups (p=0,01) | 35/118 with vigorous achalasia, with improved response rate (OR = 3,3, 95% CI 1,3-8) in multivariable analysis |
| Allescher (2001) | Prospective | No / No | 37 | 47 | Achalasia | 100 UI (Dysport); LES | 100 UI (Botox), 300 UI (Dysport) | 48m | Symptom score /9, clinical remission, LES pressure | 50 % failure rate with 100 UI (Dysport), "improved" response rates with 300 UI or 100 (Botox) | |
| Cuillere (1997) | Retrospective | No / No | 55 | 53 | Achalasia | 80 UI LES | NA | 6 m | Symptom score /9, clinical remission, LES pressure | 40% failures at M6 | Clinical improvement at M6 =15/22; 68% in patients with vigorous achalasia vs (18/33; 55%) in others |
| Pasricha (1995) | Prospective | No / No | 31 | 55 | Achalasia | 80 UI, LES | NA | 29 m | Symptom score /9, clinical remission, LES pressure, barium column retention at 5 mn | 56% clinical remission at 6 months | 53% (8/15) vigorous achalasia in the responder group vs 0% (0/11) in the non responder group (p=0,03) |
| Marjoux (2015) | Retrospective | No / No | 45 | 42 | Type III achalasia (22), DES and Jackhammer (15) | 100 UI, LES +/- esophageal body | None | 6 m | Symptom score /9, clinical remission, LES pressure | 57% M6 clinical response | No comparison between LES and LES + esophageal body injections |
| Miller (2002) | Retrospective | No / No | 29 | 61 | Non achalasia spastic EMD | 100 UI LES | None | 24 m | Symptom score /9, clinical remission, LES pressure | 72% clinical response, 48% clinical remission at 6 M | No comparison between LES and LES + esophageal body injections |
| Miller (1996) | Retrospective | No / No | 15 | 54 | Non achalasia spastic EMD | 80 UI LES | None | 11 m | Symptom score, clinical remission, | 33% clinical remission | No comparison between LES and LES + esophageal body injections |
| Storr (2001) | Prospective | No / No | 9 | 70 | DES | 100 UI, LES + esophageal body | None | 6 m | Symptom score | 89% clinical remission at M6 | |
| Vanuitsel (2013) | Prospective | Yes / Yes | 22 | 63 | Non achalasia spastic EMD | 100 UI LES and 5 cm above | Saline | 12 m | Symptom score /9, clinical remission, LES pressure | 50% vs 10% clinical response at M1 -p=0,04) | |
| Kelly (2013) | Retrospective | No / No | 32 | 61 | UES dysfunction | 39 +/- 19 UI | None | NA | Symptom score | 65% symptom improvement at FU visit | No follow up duration mentioned - (mixed UES dysfunctions |
| Zanninoto (2004) | Retrospective | No / No | 21 | 68 | UES dysfunction | 5-10UI | None | NA | Dysphagia relief | 43 % symptom improvement | No follow up duration mentioned - 1 fatal adverse event after botox - mixed UES dysfunction |
| Afonsi (2010) | Retrospective | No / No | 34 | 65 | UES dysfunction | 15 UI | None | NA | Dysphagia relief | 43 % symptom improvement | Mixed UES dysfunction |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# Balloon dilation

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Chuah (2008) | Retrospective | | 33 | 48.5 +/- 17.5 years | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation | 30 | | 6 weeks, 6 and 12 months | Scoring based on Parishca et al. NEJM 1995 al Symptom score + some manometry | Symptom score + some manometry | Thirty-three patients were treated, excellent results in 27, good results in 3, and failure in 3 (1 requiring surgical treatment later). |
| Tanaka (2010) | Prospective | | 55 | Median age 58.0 years | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation | 30 | | 6 and 12 months (and longer) | Bespoke scoring: dysphagia and regurgitation) were evaluated and each was given a score between 0 and 2 (almost no symptoms = 0, occasional symptoms = 1 and daily symptoms = 2). | Symptom score | When the cut-off value was set at 40 years of age, the success rate of PD in the <40-year age group was 85.7%, while the >40-year age group achieved a rate of only 38.5%. |
| Ghoshal (2001) | Randomized Controlled Trial | | 10 Rigiflex vs. 7 Botox | | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation | 30 then 30 if symptom recurrence | | 1 week, 6 and 12 months (total follow up for 35.2+/-14 weeks) | Bespoke Dysphagia grading | Symptom score/Need for re-intervention | The cumulative dysphagia-free state using the Kaplan-Meier method decreased progressively in BT-treated compared with dilatation-treated patients (P=0.027). |
| Maris (2010) | Retrospective | | 82 | Mean 46±11 years | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation | 30 then 30 if symptom recurrence then 30 if symptom recurrence | | 6 and 12 months | Bespoke scoring: Clinical remission (free of symptoms) b) no clinical response (c) deterioration | Symptom score/Need for re-intervention | 98 dilatations were performed; 68 patients (83%) underwent a single dilatation, 12 (15%) required a second procedure within a median of 1,7 mo (range 0.8- 2,0 mo), and only 2 patients, (2%) who were poor surgical candidates underwent a third procedure. Post-procedural seven of the 12 patients with no improvement after the second dilatation were considered for surgical myotomy and they were lost to follow up. |
| Dobrucali (2004) | Retrospective | | 43 | Mean age 43 years (range 19-73) | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation | 30 then 35 if symptom recurrence then 35 if symptom recurrence | | 6 and 12 months - mean follow-up period was 2.4 years (6 mo - 5 years). | Bespoke symptom score: questionnaire regarding presence and severity of their difficulty in swallowing solids and liquids on a 5 point subjective visual scale: 0 = no symptoms, 1 = mild, 2 = moderate, 3 = severe, 4 = very severe. | Symptom score/Need for re-intervention | 30 mm balloon achieved a satisfactory result in 24 patients (54%) and the 35 mm balloon in 78% of the remainder (14/18). 38 (88%) were relieved of their symptoms after only one or two sessions. Five patients were referred for surgery (one for esophageal perforation and four for persistent or recurrent symptoms). Among the patients whose follow up information was available, the percentage of patients in remission was 79% (19/24) at 1 year and 54% (7/13) at 5 years. |
| Smeets (2015) | Prospective | | 26 | Median age 52 years, range 19–75 years) | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation + Endoflip vs healthy subjects | 30 then 35 as graded protocol | | 6 and 12 months | Symptom score + Endoflip distensibility | Symptom score + Endoflip distensibility | EGJ distensibility was increased after PD from 0.9 (0.7–1.5) to 4.2 (3.0–5.7) mm²/mmHg (p < 0.001). No difference was found in EGJ distensibility directly after PD between patients with good and poor clinical outcome at 1-year follow-up. |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# Balloon dilation (continued)

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Vaezi (1999) | Randomized Controlled Trial | | 24 | Randomized to botulinum toxin (22 patients, median age 57 years) or pneumatic dilatation (20 patients, median age 56 years). | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation vs Botox (randomized) | 30 then 35 if symptom recurrence vs Botox | | 1, 3, 6, 9 and 12 months | Symptoms were evaluated by a modified symptom score⁹ consisting of the sum of the scores for dysphagia, regurgitation, and chest pain. The frequency of each symptom was graded on a scale ranging from 0 to 5 (0 = none; 1 = once per month or less; 2 = once per week, up to three to four times a month; 3 = two to four times per week; 4 = once per day; 5 = several times per day). Eckardt et al 1992 | Symptom score at 1, 3, 6, 9 and 12 months/Need for re-intervention as well as esophageal manometry initially and at one month, and barium esophagram initially and at one, six, and 12 months posttreatment. | Pneumatic dilatation resulted in a significantly (p=0.02) higher cumulative remission rate. At 12 months, 14/20 (70%) pneumatic dilatation and 7/22 (32%) botulinum toxin treated patients were in symptomatic remission (p=0.017). |
| Allescher (2001) | Prospective | | Botox n=23 vs Dilatation n=14 | Botox 46.7 +/- 16.4 vs Dilatation 48.7 +/- 14.7 years | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation | 35 then 40 if symptom recurrence | | Before treatment then 1 week, 1 month and every 6 months after | Global symptom score (0-10) before, 1 week, 1 month and every 6 months after | Symptom score/Need for re-intervention | At 12 months neither was superior. At 48 months all who had botox experienced relapse vs 45% treated with dilatation still symptom free. |
| Mikaeli (2004) | Prospective | | 262 - first 62 patients (group A) underwent dilatation with initial use of 35 mm balloon with inflation pressure of 10 psi in 10 seconds (s), then In group B (200 patients) initially used a 30 mm balloon with inflation pressure of 10 psi in 30 s and dilatation was repeated with incrementally larger balloons (35 and 40 mm) in case of relapse. | Group A 38.9 (s.d. 14.6) vs. Group B 39.2 (s.d. 15.1) | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation | Group 1: 35 then 40 if symptom recurrence then 40 if symptom recurrence. Group 2: 30 then 35 if symptom recurrence then 40 if symptom recurrence | | 6 and 12 months | Bespoke symptom score: Dysphagia to solids, Dysphagia to liquids, Active regurgitation, Passive regurgitation, Chest pain scored according to symptoms at Each meal, Daily, Weekly, Monthly, None | Symptom score/Need for re-intervention | The cumulative proportional remission rate with single dilatation in groups A and B decreased from 83 and 75% in 6 months to 60 and 57% after 30 months of therapy respectively (N=NS). In patients who had undergone further dilatations the probability of remaining in remission at 1 year after the first and the second dilatation was 38 and 88% in group A, 20 and 89% in group B respectively. The probability of remaining in remission for 2 years increased from 20% after the first dilatation to 70% after the second dilatation. Graded pneumatic balloon dilatation with 30 mm diameter and slower rate of balloon inflation is an effective and safe initial method of therapy for achalasia. |
| Boeckxstaens (2011) | Randomized Controlled Trial | | 201 patients were randomly assigned to pneumatic dilation (95 patients) or LHM (106). | Mean age: LHM (45.5) vs Dilatation (46.4) | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation vs LHM (randomized) | 30 then 35 as graded protocol then 40 if symptom recurrence | | 1 and 2 years (mean 43 months) | Eckardt score | Symptom score/Need for re-intervention/Timed barium swallow | Rate of therapeutic success with pneumatic dilation was 90% after 1 year of follow-up and 86% after 2 years, as compared with a rate with LHM of 93% after 1 year and 90% after 2 years (P = 0.46). After 2 years of follow-up, there was no significant between-group difference in the pressure at the lower esophageal sphincter (LHM, 10 mm Hg [95% CI, 8.7 to 12]; pneumatic dilation, 12 mm Hg [95% CI, 9.7 to 14]; P = 0.27); esophageal emptying, as assessed by the height of barium-contrast column (LHM, 1.9 cm [95% CI, 0 to 6.8]; pneumatic dilation, 3.7 cm [95% CI, 0 to 8.8]; P = 0.21); or quality of life. |
| Moonen (2016) | Randomized Controlled Trial | | 201 newly diagnosed patients with achalasia were randomly assigned to PD (n=96) or LHM (n=105). | Mean age: LHM (45.7 SD 14.3) vs Dilatation (46.4 SD 15.6) | Patients with achalasia undergoing dilation vs LHM (randomized) | 30 then 35 as graded protocol then 40 if symptom recurrence | | 5 years | Eckardt score | Symptom score/Need for re-intervention/Timed barium swallow | 84% and 82% success after 5 years for LHM and PD, respectively (p=0.92, log-rank test). Per-protocol analysis (5-year success rates: 82% for LHM vs 91% for PD, p=0.08, log-rank test). |
| Vela (2006) | Prospective | | 106 patients treated by graded PD (1–3 dilatations with progressively larger balloons) and 73 patients treated by HM (20 had failed graded PD and crossed over to HM). | Mean age PD group (52) vs LHM (47) (p=0.02) | Patients with achalasia undergoing single vs graded dilation vs LHM | The smallest balloon (30 mm) was used first. For failures, a 35-mm balloon was used after at least 4 weeks, followed by a 40-mm balloon if necessary | | 6 months and 6 years | Bespoke symptom score: 5-point scale (0 = never, 1 <=1 time/mo, 2 <=1 time/wk, 3 <=3 times/wk, 4 <=3 times per week to daily, 5 = every meal) for presence of dysphagia to solids and liquids and presence of chest pain, weight loss, heartburn (including proton pump inhibitor [PPI] use). | Symptom score/Need for re-intervention/Freedom from subsequent therapy/Timed barium swallow. Success of single PD was defined as freedom from subsequent PDs. The success of graded PD and HM was defined as freedom from cross-over to alternative treatment, or dysphagia/regurgitation less than 3 times per week at last follow-up evaluation | Success of single PD was defined as freedom from additional PDs: 62% at 6 months and 28% at 6 years. Success of graded PD and HM, defined as dysphagia/regurgitation < 3 times/wk or freedom from alternative treatment, was similar: 90% (graded dilatation) vs 89% (LHM) at 6 months and 44% (PD) vs 57% (LHM) at 6 years |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# Endoflip / Esoflip

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Rohof 2012 | Prospective, non-randomized, controlled, single center | No | 49, 15 HV | Adults | 15 HV (8m, 40+/-4.1 years), 34 achalasia, 30 of which in whom distensibility performed (16m, age 51 +/- 3.1) | 13 PD, 7 LHM, 3 both (seven new patients (6PD, 1LHM)) PD performed with Rigiflex 30 and 35mm within 1-2 weeks. Myotomy 6cm above EGJ, 1,5 cm below, Dor procedure, ES 325 | (before/after), HV for normative data | Short | EGJ Distensibility, LES pressure, Eckardt Score, Stasis on barium esophagogram. Successful treatment if Eckardt <4 | EGJ distensibility significantly reduced in untreated patients with achalasia compared with controls (0.7 ± 0.9 vs 6.3 ± 0.7 mm²/mm Hg; P < .001). In patients with achalasia, EGJ distensibility correlated with esophageal emptying (r = −0.72; P < .01) and symptoms (r = 0.61; P < .01) and significantly increased with treatment. EGJ distensibility was significantly higher in patients successfully treated (Eckardt score < or equal to 3) compared with those with an Eckardt score >3 (1.6 ± 0.3 vs 4.4 ± 0.5 mm²/mm Hg; P = .001). Even when LES pressure was low, EGJ distensibility could be reduced, which was associated with impaired emptying and recurrent symptoms | |
| Wu 2018 | Prospective, non-randomized, controlled, single center | No | 54 patients, 15 controls (patients undergoing routine endoscopy) | Adults | Achalasia patients (46% previous treatment failure, rest novel patients) | PD (30, 35 and 40mm) in patients (54% treatment-naive), of 25 non-naive relapsed 10 with LHM and 15 prior PD, ES325 | (before/after), HV for normative data | 3 months | CSA values, intrabag pressure, volume. Distensibility expressed as dynamic curves, Distensibility index (EGJ-DI), Summary scores according to Matthews et al. | 54 patients, we performed thirty-seven 30 mm; twenty 35 mm and six 40 mm PDs. The short-term response rate to the graded PD was 93% (27/29) in newly diagnosed achalasia; 87% (13/15) and 70% (7/10) in those who had relapsed after previous PD and Heller's Myotomy, respectively. Among those demonstrating an immediate response, EGJ-DI increased by an average of 4.5 mm²/mmHg (95% CI (3.5, 5.5) (P <0.001). Within-subject Δ EGJ-DI was highly predictive of immediate clinical response with AUROC of 0.89 (95% CI [0.80, 0.98], P <0.001). An increment in EGJ-DI of 1.8 mm²/mmHg after a single PD predicts an immediate response with an accuracy of 87%. | |
| Pandolfino (2013) | Prospective, non randomized, controlled, single center | No | 54 patients, 20 controls | Adults | Achalasia patients (23 untreated, 31 treated (17PD, 10 LHM, 4 POEM)) | ES 325 measurements (and HRM, barium) in patients and controls. Correlating symptom severity with EGJ DI as per Endoflip | Treated/untreated, Control flip data for different volume fillings | Short | FLIP CSA, DI, balloon pressure, stasis on timed barium esophagogram and esophageal diameter, GERD-Q, HRM metrics (basal pressure, nadir EGJ relaxation, IRP) | Of 31 treated patients, 17 had good and 14 poor treatment response. The EGJ-DI was significantly different among groups, greatest in the control subjects (8.2) and least in the untreated patients (0.7); patients with good treatment response had significantly greater EGJ-DI (3.4) than untreated or patients with poor response (1.5). The correlations between EGJ-DI and ES (r=-0.49) and integrated relaxation pressure on HRM (r=-0.41) were significant | |
| Kapelle (2015) | Prospective, non-randomized, uncontrolled, single center | No | 10 patients | Adults | Newly diagnosed achalasia | ES 330 dilation to app. 28mm for 3 minutes. Repeated 2 days later with same balloon. Pressure recordings at maximum and at 30ml | | 1 week, 1 months, 3 months | Eckardt Score, estimated EGJ-DI (via ES330 system), achalasia DSQoL | Technical success 100%. Median esophagogastric junction distensibility (mm²/mmHg) increased from 1.1 (IQR 0.6–1.3) before dilation therapy to 7.0 (IQR 5.5–17.8) afterwards (P=0.005). No major complications were seen. Three patients (30 %) reported recurrent dysphagia (treatment failure at 3 months, 1 of which had sarcoidosis). 2 patients required LHM with Dor (men, age 28,33). Median achalasia-DSQol decreased from 53 (overall) to 18.5 after three months (excluding 2 LHM patients) | |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# Appendix 3s part b

## Gastroparesis – data extraction

### Botox and stenting

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** GCSI, Clinical remission (Y/N), % gastric retention at 4h on GES **Safety** Complications/ S)AEs, migration | |
| Clarke (2013) | Retrospective | No / No | 3 | 23,15,45 | Medically refractory gastroparesis | Transpyloric Niti S SEMS, no fixation | None | 5 months | Symptoms, % gastric emptying at 4h GES | Symptom relief with stent in place | Symptom relief with stents in place - recurrent symptom after stent migration (patient 2) |
| Kashab (2015) | Retrospective | No / No | 30 | 42 | Medically refractory gastroparesis | Transpyloric double layer Niti S SEMS, fixation with clips, OTSC, or endoscopic suturing, stent proximal to the major papilla | None | 5 months | Symptoms, % gastric emptying at 4h GES | 75% clinical improvement, adverse events = 0%, GES with the stent in place normalized or improved in 37% (11/30), stents dwell time = 67 days, stent migration = 59% (100% no fixation, 50% clips, 71% OTSC, 48% ES, p= NS) | Stent fixation in 94% (44/47), clips (2/30), OTSC (18/30), ES (24/30) |
| Kim (2018) | Prospective | No / No | 20 | 66 | Gastroparesis after distal gastrectomy | Hanarostent 18-20 mm, 70, 90, 110 mm, partially covered, no stent fixation | None | 39 m | Ability to tolerate oral intake at day 2 and day 14 | 75% clinical success at D2, 100% clinical success at D14, 93% symptom improvement at 1 year (15/20 patients undergoing follow up), AE = 0%, 20% migration rate at D14, stent dwell time = 51 days | Diagnosis of gastroparesis: clinical, endoscopic, barium swallow. Billroth I and 2 anastomoses, spontaneous stent migration in 75% (14/20) |
| Saadi (2018) | Retrospective | No / No | 44 | 46 | Medically refractory gastroparesis | Endoflip before treatment | None | NA | Symptoms, % gastric emptying at 4h GES, complications | | Article in Spanish |
| Gourcerol (2015) | Prospective | No / No | 27 | 42 | Medically refractory gastroparesis | Endoflip before dilation | No | 10 days | Symptoms, pyloric compliance, half emptying time at GES | GIQLI score 72,5 to 89,3, pyloric compliance 7,4 to 20,1 (p<0,01), half emptying time 287 to 224 (p=0,15) | |
| Friedenberg (2008) | Randomized | Yes / Yes | 16 | | Medically refractory gastroparesis, GCSI > 27 | 200 UI Botox injection | Saline injection | 1 month | Symptoms, % gastric emptying at 4h GES, complications | Clinical improvement: 38% (Botox) vs 56% (placebo), gastric retention 4h -13,3 vs -3,6 (p=0,6), complications: 0% | |
| Arts (2007) | Randomized | Yes / Yes | 12 | 48 | Medically refractory gastroparesis | 100 UI Botox injection | Saline injection | 1 month | Symptoms, half emptying time at GES | GCSI improvement from 21,4 to 15,7 (p=0,02) with botox and 32 to 26 (p<0,05) with placebo. Solid half emptying time 121 to 87 (p=0,01) vs 107 to 69 (p= 0,007), complications: 0% | |
| Coleski (2009) | Retrospective | No / No | 179 | 44 | Medically refractory gastroparesis | 100 UI (n=82), 150 UI (n=43), 200 UI (n=54) | No | 1-4 months | Symptoms score (GCSI) | Response rate = 54% (100 UI) vs 77% (200UI), p= 0,02 | |
| Reddymasu (2009) | Prospective | No / No | 10 | 51 | Post vagotomy gastroparesis | 100 UI (n=2), 200 UI (n=9) | No | 6 m | Symptoms, complications | GCSI improvement from 16 to 9 (p>0,05), complications = 0% | |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

---

### Balloon dilation

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Gourcerol (2015) | Prospective open study | No | 10 | 42.5 +/- 5 (mean +/- SEM) | Gastroparesis refractory to medical treatment, with low (<10 mm²/mmHg) fasting pyloric compliance using ENDOFLIP | Single-use wire-guided pyloric balloon (Boston Scientific) inflated 3 times at 20 mm (6 atm) during 1 min | | 10 days | Pyloric compliance (Endoflip) | 10 days after pyloric dilation, fasting pyloric compliance increased in all patients from 7.4 +/- 0.4 to 20.1 +/- 4.9 mm²/mmHg | |
| | | | | | | | | | Gastric emptying (13C–OCTANOIC ACID BREATH TEST) | T1/2 accelerated in 7/8 patients from 287 +/- 7 min to 224 +/- min (P = 0.0,15) | |
| | | | | | | | | | Gastrointestinal Quality of Life Index | GIQLI score improved from 72.5 +/-5.5 to 89.3 +/-6.1 | |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# Balloon dilation (continued)

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Wellington (2017) | Prospective study | Open (Botox or balloon dilation) | 8 out of 33 | 42 (mean) | Symptoms of gastroparesis (79% idiopathic, 29% diabetic) refractory to medical treatment, delayed 4-hour, solid-phase gastric emptying study, normal gastric myoelectrical activity | Through The Scope (TTS) balloon (Cook Medical) 20 mm in diameter and 5 cm in length, inflated to 20 mm diameter with 50 cm³ of water for 2min | | 1 to 3 months | Symptom improvement (adapted from GCSI score) | 4 out of 8 | Overnight fast, endoscopy under midazolam and fentanyl |
| Bae (2015) | Retrospective study | | 45 (22 male) | 60.9 ± 11.4 years | Pyloric spasm after pylorus-preserving gastrectomy, mean interval between surgery and balloon dilatations was 29.1 ± 36.2 days | A 4~6 cm-long, 16~25 mm-diameter noncompliant, low-pressure balloon catheter was passed over the guide wire then slowly inflated with 2~8 atm for 1 minute with a diluted water-soluble contrast medium. The inflation was repeated 1 to 12 times with 1-minute intervals between inflations in one session. | | 22.6 month (mean) | Complications | 1 transmural tear | Post dilation contrast RX to exclude leakage |
| | | | | | | | | | Mean subjective symptom score | 9.04 ± 2.06 prior to treatment to 1.93 ± 1.56 after treatment (P <.0001). | |
| | | | | | | | | | Good response after 1 session | 29 | |
| | | | | | | | | | Good response after 2 sessions | 4 | |
| Kim (2008) | Retrospective | Open | 21 (male) | 64.6 +/- 6.6 | Symptoms of delayed gastric emptying and 50% gastric emptying time over 180 min post esophagectomy | Median balloon size was 20 mm (18—25 mm), inflated for waist obliteration during 15—20 min using 2-3 atm of pressure | | ? | 50 % Gastric emptying (min) | 410.3 +/- 322.4 (before); 227.3 +/- 166.6 (after) | Post dilation contrast RX to exclude leakage |
| | | | | | | | | | Clinical symptoms | Immediate improvement in all, recurrence in 2 patients after 3 and 4 months (second BD) | |
| | | | | | | | | | Complication | 0 | |
| Ericson (2013) | Retrospective study | | 13 (7 male) | 36-77 | Gastric outlet obstruction symptoms after esophagectomy | 30- to 35-mm pneumatic balloon intended for treatment of achalasia (Rigiflex®, Boston Scientific) inflated for 1-2 min | | 205 days (mean) | N dilations | 1 (8); 2(2); 3 (3) | |
| | | | | | | | | | Improvement of nausea and regurgitation | Significant | |
| Lanuti (2011) | Retrospective | | 38 | 63 +/- 12 | Clinical and radiographic delayed gastric emptying post esophagectomy (22.5 days (range, 8 to 874 days) | Radial expansion esophageal balloon dilators (Boston Scientific) ranging from 10 to 20 mm, inflated for 2 to 3 minutes and repeated. Pyloric dilatation was performed until patency of the pylorus was achieved when the 10-mm endoscope could easily traverse the pyloric channel. | | | Success rate | 36 (95%) | |
| | | | | | | | | | 1 to 5 dilations (mean 1.7 +/- 1.0) | | |
| Maus (2016) | Retrospective | | 60 | | Post-esophagectomy symptoms and endoscopic signs of pyloric spasm | 20 mm CRE (Boston Scientific), maximum inflation pressure of 608 kPa, or 30 mm achalasia balloon dilator Rigiflex (Boston Scientific) maximum inflation pressure of 137 kPa 2-3 min inflation | | | N dilatations | 1 (39), 2 (21) | Sedation with propofol |
| | | | | | | | | | Diameter | 20 mm (25); 30 (35) | |
| | | | | | | | | | Complication | 0 | |
| | | | | | | | | | Redilation rate for 30 mm balloon | 20% | |
| | | | | | | | | | Redilation rate for 20 mm balloon | 52.90% | |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# G-POEM

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Shlomovitz (2014) | Case series, retrospective | No | 7 | 51 | 2 PSG, 5 IG | x | | 6.5M | GES, Gastroparesis symptoms, clinical response, AEs | Clinical response: 85.7%, improvement of symptoms: nausea, epigastric burning, GES: 21%–4%, 1x bleeding pre-pyloric ulcer | |
| Khashab (2016) | Multicenter trial, 2 centers USA | No | 30 | | 11 DG, 12 PSG, 7 IG | x | | 5.5M | GES, Gastroparesis symptoms, clinical response | Clinical response: 86%, GCSI: N/A improvement of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, GES improvement 37%–17%, AEs: 1x capnoperitoneum, 1x prepyloric ulcer | |
| Dacha (2017) | Case series, retrospective | No | 16 | | 9 DG, 1 PSG, 5 IG, 1 PIG | x | | 12M | GES, GCSI, SF-36, clinical response, AEs | Clinical response: 81%, GCSI: 3.4–1.5, improvement of nausea, vomiting, early satiety, GES improvement 62.9%–17.6%, AEs: none | |
| Rodriguez (2017) | Case series, retrospective | No | 47 | | 12 DG, 8 PSG, 27 IG | x | | 3M | GES, GCSI, SF-36, AEs | GCSI improvement: 3.6–3.3, GES improvement: 37.2%–20.4%, Clinical response: not proven, AEs: none | |
| Malik (2017) | Case series, retrospective | No | 11 | | 1 DG, 8 PSG, 4 IG | x | | 3M | GES, GCSI, AEs | Clinical response: 72.7%, GCSI 2.1–1.9, improvement: vomiting, retching, loss of appetite, GES improvement: 49%–33%, AE: pulmonary embolism | |
| Mekaroonkamol (2018) | Case series, retrospective | No | 30 | | 12 DG, 5 PSG, 12 IG, 1 PIG | x | | 18M | GES, GCSI, SF-36, AEs hospitalization rate, ER visit rate | GCSI improvement: 3.5–2.1, GES: 63%–22%, clinical improvement: 80%, improvement of symptoms: nausea, vomiting, early satiety, transient improvement of pain up to 6M, AEs: 1x tension pneumoperitoneum. | |
| Kahaleh (2018) | Case series, retrospective | No | 33 | 52 | 7 DG, 12 PSG, 13 IG, 1x other | x | | 11.5M | GES, GCSI, AEs | Clinical response: 85%, GCSI: 3.3–0.8, GES: improvement 222min–143min. Improvement of nausea, vomiting, early satiety, bloating, abdominal pain, AEs: 1 bleeding, 1x ulcer | |
| Landreneau (2019) | Retrospective analysis, single center | Laparoscopic pyloromyotomy (LP) | 60, 30 vs 30 | 44.1 - POP 45.4 - LP | 38 IGP, 10 DGP, 12 PGP | POP (GPOEM) | PGP | 3M | GES, GCSI, AEs, length of stay (LOS), operation time | POP vs LP: mean operative time 33 vs 99, LOS 1.4 vs 4.6, more AE after surgery 16.7 vs. 3.3% (p = 0.086), GES of POP 32.9–10.7%, p = 0.042; 35.9–2.5 with LP, p = 0.029), pre and post GCSI 3M (POP: 4.0–2.4, p < 0.001; pyloroplasty: 4.0–2.3, p = 0.001). | |
| Jacques J (2018) | Prospective study | No | 20 | x | 10 diabetic, 10 nondiabetic | x | | 3M | Technical success, clinical success (degrees of at least 0.75 on the GCSI) GES, Endoflip, PAGI-QoL and GIQLI, AEs | Clinical improvement 90%, GCSI: 3.5–1.3, GES: 345 min–100 min, %H4 57.5%–15%, vs.; the myotomy was extended 1–2 cm along the antral muscularis propria until thin "pink" serosa was visible. | |
| Strong AT (2019) | Retrospective analysis of prospectively maintained cases, single center | No | 38 of 177 | 55.2 | Only post-surgical GP | x | | >3M | Mean GCSI and subscores, GES, wireless capsule | Post-POP length of stay was 1.2 days (range 0–6 days). GES: 46.4%–17.9%, GCSI mean: 3.72–2.43 | |
| Rodriguez (2018) | Retrospective | No | 100 | 45 | iGP 56, dGP 21, pGP 19, other 4 | Lesser curvature 95, Great curvature 4, Posterior wall 1 | x | 3M | GCSI, GES, AEs, procedural time | Procedural time: 33.8 min, length of stay was 1.3/1.05, GCSI pre and post: 3.8–2.4 (P < 0.001), improvement of fulness 3.3–1.8, nausea 4.1–2.8, bloating 3.9–2.5, GES pre and post: mild 17%–2, moderate 11%–7, severe 39–10%, AE 10% into 30 day were 4 bleeding (2 from ulcer, 2 unknown origin), laparoscopy for persistent pneumoperitoneum in 1 on POD1, 2 severe dehydration, 1 death not related to POP | |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# G-POEM tunnel location

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD | |
| Kahaleh (2018) | Case series, retrospective | No | 33 | 52 | 7 DG, 12 PSG, 13 IG, 1x other | GPOEM entry tunnel site anterior 2 (6%) GPOEM posterior 31 (94%) | x | 11.5M | Technical success, Tunnel length cm, Procedure time, Closure type, AEs. | Technical success: 100%, tunnel length: 3.34cm, procedure time: 77.6, Clips: 32 (97%), suture 3 (9.1%), AEs: 1 bleeding, 1x ulcer | |
| Rodriguez (2018) | Retrospective | No | 100 | 45 | iGP 56, dGP 21, pGP 19, other 4 | Lesser curvature 95 pts, Great curvature 4 pts, Posterior wall 1 pts | x | 3M | GCSI, GES, AEs, procedural time, | Procedural time: 33.8 min, length of stay was 1.3/1.05, GES pre and post: mild 17%–2, moderate 11%–7, severe 39–10%, AE 10%, in 30 day were 4 bleeding (2 from ulcer, 2 unknown origin), laparoscopy for persistent pneumoperitoneum in 1 on POD1, 2 severe dehydration, 1 death not related to POP | |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.

# G-POEM: length of myotomy

| Author (year) | Methods | | | Population | | | Intervention | | | Outcomes | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | **Design** | **Randomization / blinding** | **N** | **Age** | **Inclusion criteria** | **Protocol (details) of Intervention** | **Protocol (details) of Comparison** | **Follow-up** | **Outcome measures (+ definitions)** | **Outcomes of interest\*** | **Remarks** |
| | | | | | | | | | | **Efficacy:** - Symptoms scores - Clinical remission (Y/N) - Need of re-intervention - QoL **Safety** - Complications/ S)AEs - Occurrence of GERD **Other relevant outcomes** | |
| Jung Y (2015) | Prospective ex vivo study. | No | 23 | x | x | Pyloromyotomy large stomachs | Pyloromyotomy small stomachs | x | Mean pyloric diameter | A 3 cm pyloromyotomy for a large animal series and 2 cm for the small animal series appeared to be most appropriate for enlargement of the pylorus. | |
| Dacha S (2017) | Case series, retrospective analysis | No | 16 | 44.7 | Abnormal GCSI (predominant nausea, vomiting) Patient failed the gastric electrical stimulator | Submucosal bleb 5 cm before pylorus, a 2-cm mucosal incision made with an endoscopic knife, identifying the pyloric ring, Selective myotomy of the pyloric circular muscle | x | 12M | Clinical success rate: as an improvement in symptoms measured by a decrease in mean GCSI, no hospitalization for gastroparesis-related symptoms. Secondary outcomes: length of myotomy, total duration of procedure, evolution GES, QoL, adverse events. | Clinically successful in 13 of 16 patients (81%). Myotomy was carefully extended for not more than 2.5 to 3 cm proximally into the antrum. | |
| Malik (2018) | Case series, retrospective analysis | No | 13 | | 1 DG, 8 PSG, 4 IG | x | | 3M | GES, GCSI, AEs | **Length of myotomy: 3cm** Clinical response: 72.7%, GCSI 2.1–1.9, improvement: vomiting, retching, loss of appetite, GES improvement: 49%–33%, AE: pulmonary embolism | |
| Mekaroonkamol (2018) | Case series, retrospective analysis | No | 30 | | 12 DG, 5 PSG, 12 IG, 1 PIG | | | 18M | GES, GCSI, SF-36, AEs hospitalization rate, ER visit rate | **Length of myotomy: 2-3.** GCSI improvement: 3.5–2.1, GES: 63%–22%, clinical improvement: 80%, improvement of symptoms: nausea, vomiting, early satiety, transient improvement of pain up to 6M, AEs: 1x tension pneumoperitoneum. | |
| Khashab (2016) | Multicenter trial, 2 centers USA | No | 30 | | 11 DG, 12 PSG, 7 IG | x | | 5.5M | GES, Gastroparesis symptoms, clinical response | **Length of myotomy: 2.6cm** Clinical response: 86%, GCSI: N/A improvement of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, GES improvement 37%–17%, AEs: 1x capnoperitoneum, 1x prepyloric ulcer | |
| Jacques J (2018) | Prospective study | No | 20 | | 10 diabetic, 10 nondiabetic | x | | 3M | Technical success, clinical success (degrees of at least 0.75 on the GCSI) GES, Endoflip, PAGI-QoL and GIQLI, AEs, | Clinical improvement 90%, GCSI: 3.5–1.3, GES: 345 min–100 min, %H4 57.5%–15%, vs.; **The myotomy was extended 1–2 cm along the antral muscularis propria until thin "pink" serosa was visible.** | |

\*Please extract each outcome of interest (if reported), extract other outcomes if deemed relevant.